
 "There is no chance for anyone to misunderstand you. I am very sorry
 that I--I have not seen, that you have been obliged to ask for release
 from an--unpleasant--position. Go--whenever you choose."
 
 He stared at her for a moment, uncomprehending. "Mother! Oh, Mother!" he
 whispered. "Do you really mean it? Where shall we go?"
 
 "'We,'" she repeated. "Now I do misunderstand you."
 
 "Why, Mother! What do you mean? Of course we shall go together!"
 
 Madame rose from her chair, with some difficulty. "You have said," she
 went on, choosing her words carefully, "that I had no right to keep you
 chained up here. I admit it--I have not. Equally, you have no right to
 uproot me."
 
 [Sidenote: One's Own Choice]
 
 "But, Mother! Why, I couldn't go without you, and leave you alone. We
 belong together, you and I!"
 
 The hard lines of her mouth relaxed, ever so little, but her eyes were
 very dark and stern. "As much as we belong together," she resumed, "we
 belong here. Dead hands built this house, dead hands laid out that
 vineyard, dead hands have given us our work. If we fail, we betray the
 trust of those who have gone before us--we have nothing to give to those
 who come.
 
 "I've seen," she continued, with rising passion. "You were determined
 from the first to fail!"
 
 "Fail!" he echoed, with lips that scarcely moved.
 
 "Yes, for no man fails except by his own choice. You might have been
 master of the vineyard, but you have preferred to have the vineyard
 master you. Confronted with an uncongenial task, you slunk away from it
 and shielded yourself behind the sophistry that the work was unworthy of
 you. As if any work were unworthy of a man!"
 
 "I hate it," he murmured, resentfully.
 
 "Yes, just as people hate their superiors. You hate it because you can't
 do it. Year by year, I have seen the crop grow less and less; year by
 year I have seen our income decreasing. We are living now on less than
 half of what we had when you took charge of the vineyard. Last year the
 grapes were so poor that I was ashamed to use them for wine. And to
 think," she flashed at him, bitterly, "that the name of Marsh used to
 stand for quality! What does it mean now? Nothing--thanks to you!"
 
 [Sidenote: The Name of Marsh]
 
 The dull red rose to his temples and he cringed visibly. "I--I--" he
 stammered.
 
 "One moment, please, and then I shall say no more. This is between you
 and your own manhood, not between you and your mother. I put no
 obstacles in your path--you may go when and where you choose. I only ask
 you to remember that a man who has failed to do the work that lies
 nearest his hand is not likely to succeed at anything else.
 
 "It is not for you to say whether or not anything is worthy when it has
 once been given you to do. You have only to do it and make it worthy by
 the doing. When you have proved yourself capable, another task will be
 given you, but not before. You hate the vineyard because you cannot
 raise good grapes, you hate to teach school because you cannot teach
 school well. You want to find something easy to do--something that will
 require no effort."
 
 "No," he interrupted, "you're mistaken there. I want to do something
 great--I'm not asking for anything easy."
 
 [Sidenote: "I Belong Here"]
 
 "Greatness comes slowly," she answered, her voice softening a little,
 "and by difficult steps--not by leaps and bounds. You must learn the
 multiplication table before you can be an astronomer. None the less, it
 is your right to choose."
 
 "Then, granting that, why wouldn't you come with me?"
 
 "Because it is also my right to choose for myself and I belong here.
 When I identified myself with the Marsh family, I did it in good faith.
 When I was married, I came here, my children were born here, your father
 and brother and sister died here, and I shall die here too. When you go,
 I shall do my best with the vineyard."
 
 She spoke valiantly, but there was a pathetic little quiver in her lips
 as she said the last words. Alden stood at the window, contemplating the
 broad acres bordered with pine.
 
 "Do not say _when_ I go, Mother--say _if_ I go."
 
 "I thought you had decided," she murmured, but her heart began to beat
 quickly, nevertheless.
 
 "No, I haven't, but I'll decide in the course of the day. Good-bye for
 the present."
 
 He stooped, kissed the cheek she turned to him, and went out, assuming a
 cheerfulness he did not feel. Madame leaned back in her chair with her
 eyes closed, exhausted by the stress of emotion. The maid came in for
 orders, she gave them mechanically, then went into the living-room. She
 was anxious to be alone, but felt unequal to the exertion of climbing
 the stairs.
 
 [Sidenote: The Pictured Face]
 
 As the hours passed, she slowly regained her composure. It seemed
 impossible that Alden should go away and leave her when they two were
 alone in the world, and, as he said, belonged together. More than ever
 that morning had he looked like his father.
 
 Old memories crowded thickly upon her as she sat there. Bits of her
 childhood flashed back at her out of the eternal stillness, "even as the
 beads of a told rosary." Since the day she met Alden's father,
 everything was clear and distinct, for, with women, life begins with
 love and the rest is as though it had never been.
 
 An old daguerreotype was close at hand in a table drawer. She opened the
 ornate case tenderly, brushed the blue velvet that lined it, and kissed
 the pictured face behind the glass. So much had they borne together, so
 much had they loved, and all was gone--save this!
 
 The serene eyes, for ever youthful, looked back at her across the years.
 Except for the quaint, old-fashioned look inseparable from an old
 picture, the face was that of the boy who had left her a few hours ago.
 The deep, dark eyes, the regular features, the firm straight chin, the
 lovable mouth, the adorable boyishness--all were there, shut in by blue
 velvet and glass.
 
 [Sidenote: The Man She Loved]
 
 Madame smiled as she sat there looking at it. She had always had her way
 with the father--why should she doubt her power over the son? Supremely
 maternal as she was, the sheltering instinct had extended even to the
 man she loved. He had been outwardly strong and self-confident, assured,
 self-reliant, even severe with others, but behind the bold exterior, as
 always to the eyes of the beloved woman, had been a little, shrinking,
 helpless child, craving the comfort of a woman's hand--the sanctuary of
 a woman's breast.
 
 Even in her own hours of stress and trial, she had feared to lean upon
 him too much, knowing how surely he depended upon her. He was more than
 forty when he died, yet to her he had been as one of her children,
 though infinitely dearer than any child could be.
 
 The quick tears started at the thought of the children, for the childish
 prattle had so soon been hushed, the eager little feet had been so
 quickly stilled. Alden was the first-born son, with an older daughter,
 who had been named Virginia, for her mother. Virginia would have been
 thirty-two now, and probably married, with children of her own. The
 second son would have been twenty-eight, and, possibly, married also.
 There might have been a son-in-law, a daughter-in-law, and three or
 four children by this time, had these two lived.
 
 [Sidenote: The House of Memories]
 
 So, through the House of Memories her fancy sped, as though borne on
 wings. Childish voices rang through the empty corridors and the fairy
 patter of tiny feet sounded on the stairs. One by one, out of the
 shadows, old joys and old loves came toward her; forgotten hopes and
 lost dreams. Hands long since mingled with the dust clasped hers once
 more with perfect understanding--warm lips were crushed upon hers with
 the old ecstasy and the old thrill. Even the sorrows, from which the
 bitterness had strangely vanished, came back out of the darkness, not
 with hesitancy, but with assurance, as though already welcomed by a
 friend.
 
 Alden did not come home to luncheon, so Madame made only a pretence of
 eating. As the long afternoon wore away, she reproached herself bitterly
 for her harshness. There had been pain in the boy's eyes when he bent to
 kiss her--and she had turned her cheek.
 
 She would have faced any sort of privation for this one beloved son--the
 only gift Life had not as yet taken back. Perhaps, after all, he knew
 best, for have not men led and women followed since, back in Paradise,
 the First Woman gave her hand trustingly to the First Man?
 
 [Sidenote: Visions in the Crystal Ball]
 
 Long, slanting sunbeams, alight with the gold of afternoon, came into
 the room by another window, and chanced upon the crystal ball. Madame's
 face grew thoughtful. "I wonder," she mused, "if I dare to try!"
 
 She was half afraid of her own sorcery, because, so many times, that
 which she had seen had come true. Once, when a child was ill, she had
 gazed into the crystal and seen the little white coffin that, a week
 later, was carried out of the front door. Again, she had seen the vision
 of a wedding which was unexpectedly fulfilled later, when a passing
 cousin begged the hospitality of her house for a marriage.
 
 She drew her chair up to the table, made sure of the proper light, and
 leaned over the ball. For a time there was darkness, then confused
 images that meant nothing, then at last, clear and distinct as a flash
 of lightning, her own son, holding a woman in his arms.
 
 Madame pushed the ball aside, profoundly disturbed. Was the solution of
 their problem, then, to come in that way? And who was the woman?
 
 In the dazzling glimpse she had caught no detail save a shimmering white
 gown and her son's face half hidden by the masses of the woman's hair. A
 faint memory of the hair persisted; she had never seen anything quite
 like it. Was it brown, or golden, or--perhaps red? Yes, red--that was
 it, and in all the circle of their acquaintance there was no woman with
 red hair.
 
 [Sidenote: Alden's Decision]
 
 It was evident, then, that he was going away. Very well, she would go
 too. And when Alden had found his woman with the red hair, she would
 come back, alone--of course they would not want her.
 
 She felt suddenly lonely, as though she had lived too long. For the
 first time, she forgot to light the candles on the mantel when the room
 became too dark to see. She had sat alone in the darkness for some time
 when she heard Alden's step outside.
 
 When he came in, he missed the accustomed lights. "Mother!" he called,
 vaguely alarmed. Then, again: "Mother! Where are you, Mother dear?"
 
 "I'm here," she responded, rising from her chair and fumbling along the
 mantel-shelf for matches. "I'm sorry I forgot the candles." The mere
 sound of his voice had made her heart leap with joy.
 
 He was muddy and tired and his face was very white. "I know it's late,"
 he said, apologetically, "and I'll go up to dress right now. I--I've
 decided to--stay."
 
 His voice broke a little on the last word. Madame drew his tall head
 down and kissed him, forgetting all about the crystal ball. "For your
 own sake?" she asked; "or for mine?"
 
 [Sidenote: An Unfair Advantage]
 
 "For yours, of course. I'll try to do as you want me to, Lady Mother. I
 have nothing to do but to make you happy."
 
 For answer, she kissed him again. "I must dress, too," she said.
 
 When they met at dinner, half an hour later, neither made any reference
 to the subject that had been under discussion. Outwardly all was calm
 and peaceful, as deep-flowing waters may hide the rocks beneath. By the
 time coffee was served, they were back upon the old footing of
 affectionate comradeship.
 
 Afterward, he read the paper while Madame played solitaire. When she
 turned the queen of hearts, she remembered the red-haired woman whom she
 had seen in the crystal ball. And they were not going away, after all!
 Madame felt that she had in some way gained an unfair advantage over the
 red-haired woman. There would be no one, now, to take her boy away from
 her.
 
 And yet, when the time came for her to go, would she want Alden to live
 on in the old house alone, looking after the hated vineyard and teaching
 the despised school? At best, it could be only a few years more.
 
 Feeling her grave, sweet eyes upon him, Alden looked up from his paper.
 "What is it, Mother?"
 
 "Dear," she said, thoughtfully, "I want you to marry and bring me a
 daughter. I want to hold your son in my arms before I die."
 
 [Sidenote: Madame's Dream]
 
 "Rather a large order, isn't it?" He laughed indifferently, and went on
 with his reading. Madame laughed, too, as she continued her solitaire,
 but, none the less, she dreamed that night that the house was full of
 women with red hair, and that each one was gazing earnestly into the
 depths of a crystal ball.
 
 
 
 
 IV
 
 April's Sun
 
 
 [Sidenote: The Joy of Morning]
 
 With a rush of warm winds and a tinkle of raindrops, Spring danced over
 the hills. The river stirred beneath the drifting ice, then woke into
 musical murmuring. Even the dead reeds and dry rushes at the bend of the
 stream gave forth a faint melody when swayed by the full waters beneath.
 
 The joy of morning was abroad in the world. Robins sang it, winds
 whispered it, and, beneath the sod, every fibre of root and tree
 quivered with aspiration, groping through the labyrinth of darkness with
 a blind impulse toward the light. Across the valley, on the southern
 slope, a faint glow of green seemed to hover above the dark tangle of
 the vineyard, like some indefinite suggestion of colour, promising the
 sure beauty yet to come.
 
 Rosemary had climbed the Hill of the Muses early in the afternoon. She,
 too, was awake, in every fibre of body and soul. Springs had come and
 gone before--twenty-five of them--but she had never known one like this.
 A vague delight possessed her, and her heart throbbed as from
 imprisoned wings. Purpose and uplift and aspiration swayed her
 strangely; she yearned blindly toward some unknown goal.
 
 [Sidenote: The Family Religion]
 
 She had not seen Alden for a long time. The melting ice and snow had
 made the hill unpleasant, if not impossible, and the annual sewing had
 kept her closely indoors. She and Aunt Matilda had made the year's
 supply of underwear from the unbleached muslin, and one garment for each
 from the bolt of brown-and-white gingham. Rosemary disdained to say
 "gown" or even "dress," for the result of her labour was a garment,
 simply, and nothing more.
 
 Every third Summer she had a new white muslin, of the cheapest quality,
 which she wore to church whenever it was ordained that she should go.
 Grandmother and Aunt Matilda were deeply religious, but not according to
 any popular plan. They had their own private path to Heaven, and had
 done their best to set Rosemary's feet firmly upon it, but with small
 success.
 
 When she was a child, Rosemary had spent many long, desolate Sunday
 afternoons thinking how lonely it would be in Heaven with nobody there
 but God and the angels and the Starr family. Even the family, it seemed,
 was not to be admitted as an entity, but separately, according to
 individual merit. Grandmother and Aunt Matilda had many a wordy battle
 as to who would be there and who wouldn't, but both were sadly agreed
 that Frank must stay outside.
 
 [Sidenote: Rewards and Punishments]
 
 Rosemary was deeply hurt when she discovered that Grandmother did not
 expect to meet her son there, and as for her son's wife--the old lady
 had dismissed the hapless bride to the Abode of the Lost with a single
 comprehensive snort. Alternately, Rosemary had been rewarded for good
 behaviour by the promise of Heaven and punished for small misdemeanours
 by having the gates closed in her face. As she grew older and began to
 think for herself, she wondered how Grandmother and Aunt Matilda had
 obtained their celestial appointment as gate-keepers, and reflected that
 it might possibly be very pleasant outside, with the father and mother
 whom she had never seen.
 
 So, of late years, religion had not disturbed Rosemary much. She paid no
 attention to the pointed allusions to "heathen" and "infidels" that
 assailed her ears from time to time, and ceased to feel her young flesh
 creep when the Place of Torment was described with all the power of two
 separate and vivid imaginations. Disobedience troubled her no longer
 unless she was found out, and, gradually, she developed a complicated
 system of deception.
 
 When she was discovered reading a novel, she had accepted the
 inevitable punishment with outward submission. Naturally, it was not
 easy to tear out the leaves one by one, especially from a borrowed book,
 and put them into the fire, saying, each time she put one in: "I will
 never read another novel as long as I live," but she had compelled
 herself to do it gracefully. Only her flaming cheeks had betrayed her
 real feeling.
 
 [Sidenote: Forbidden Reading]
 
 A week later, when she was locked in her room for the entire day, on
 account of some slight offence, she had wept so much over the sorrows of
 Jane Eyre that even Aunt Matilda was affected when she brought up the
 bread and milk for the captive's supper. Rosemary had hidden the book
 under the mattress at the first sound of approaching footsteps, but Aunt
 Matilda, by describing the tears of penitence to the stern authority
 below, obtained permission for Rosemary to come down-stairs, eat her
 bread and milk at the table, and, afterward, to wash the dishes.
 
 She continued to borrow books from the school library, however, and
 later from Alden Marsh. When he learned that she dared not read at
 night, for fear of burning too much oil, he began to supply her with
 candles. Thus the world of books was opened to her, and many a midnight
 had found her, absorbed and breathless, straining her eyes over the last
 page. More than once she had read all night and fallen asleep afterward
 at the breakfast table.
 
 [Sidenote: Occasional Meetings]
 
 Once, long ago, Alden had called upon her, but the evening was made so
 unpleasant, both for him and his unhappy hostess, that he never came
 again. Rosemary used to go to the schoolhouse occasionally, to sit and
 talk for an hour or so after school, but some keen-eyed busy-body had
 told Grandmother and the innocent joy had come to an abrupt conclusion.
 Rosemary kept her promise not to go to the schoolhouse simply because
 she dared not break it.
 
 The windows of the little brown house, where the Starrs lived, commanded
 an unobstructed view of the Marshs' big Colonial porch, in Winter, when
 the trees between were bare, so it was impossible for the girl to go
 there, openly, as Mrs. Marsh had never returned Aunt Matilda's last
 call.
 
 Sometimes Alden wrote to her, but she was unable to answer, for
 stationery and stamps were unfamiliar possessions; Grandmother held the
 purse-strings tightly, and every penny had to be accounted for. On
 Thursday, Rosemary always went to the post-office, as _The Household
 Guardian_ was due then, so it happened that occasionally she received a
 letter, or a book which she could not return until Spring.
 
 At length, the Hill of the Muses became the one possible rendezvous,
 though, at the chosen hour of four, Rosemary was usually too weary to
 attempt the long climb. Moreover, she must be back by six to get supper,
 so one little hour was all she might ever hope for, at a time.
 
 [Sidenote: Far Above Her]
 
 Yet these hours had become a rosary of memories to her, jewelled upon
 the chain of her uneventful days. Alden's unfailing friendliness and
 sympathy warmed her heart, though she had never thought of him as a
 possible lover. In her eyes, he was as far above her as the fairy prince
 had been above Cinderella. It was only kindness that made him stoop at
 all.
 
 When the school bell, sounding for dismissal, echoed through the valley
 below, Rosemary hung her scarlet signal to the outstanding bough of the
 lowest birch, and went back to the crest of the hill to wait for him.
 She had with her the little red book that he had given her long ago, and
 which she had not had opportunity to return.
 
 She turned the pages regretfully, though she knew the poems almost by
 heart. Days, while she washed dishes and scrubbed, the exquisite melody
 of the words haunted her, like some far-off strain of music. For the
 first time she had discovered the subtle harmonies of which the language
 is capable, entirely apart from sense.
 
 Living lines stood out upon the printed page, glowing with a rapture all
 their own.
 
 [Sidenote: Thrilling Lines]
 
     "Now, shadowed by his wings, our faces yearn
         Together,"
 
 she read aloud, thrilled by the very sound.
 
     "Tender as dawn's first hill-fire," ... "What marshalled marvels
     on the skirts of May," ... "Shadows and shoals that edge
     eternity." ...
 
 "Oh," she breathed, "if only I didn't have to give it back!"
 
     "Lo! what am I to Love, the lord of all?
       One murmuring shell he gathers from the sand,--
       One little heart-flame sheltered in his hand."
 
 "What, indeed?" thought Rosemary. What was she to Love, or what ever
 might she be?
 
     "But April's sun strikes down the glades to-day;
       So shut your eyes upturned, and feel my kiss
     Creep, as the Spring now thrills through every spray,
       Up your warm throat to your warm lips: for this" ...
 
 Rosemary put the book down, face to face at last with self-knowledge.
 She would have torn down the flaming signal, but it was too late. If he
 were coming--and he never had failed to come--he would be there very
 soon.
 
        *       *       *       *       *
 
 Alden had closed his desk with a sigh as the last pair of restless
 little feet tumbled down the schoolhouse steps. Scraps of paper
 littered the floor and the room was musty and close in spite of two open
 windows. From where he sat, he could see the vineyard, with its
 perpetual demand upon him. Since his painful interview with his mother,
 he had shrunk, inwardly, from even the sight of the vineyard. It somehow
 seemed to have a malicious air about it. Mutely it challenged his
 manhood, menaced his soul.
 
 [Sidenote: Uneventful Days]
 
 He had accepted the inevitable but had not ceased to rebel. The coming
 years stretched out before him in a procession of grey, uneventful days.
 Breakfast, school, luncheon, school, long evenings spent in reading to
 his mother, and, from Spring to frost, the vineyard, with its
 multitudinous necessities.
 
 He felt, keenly, that his mother did not quite understand him. In fact,
 nobody did, unless it was Rosemary, whom he had not seen for weeks.
 Brave little Rosemary, for whom life consisted wholly of deprivations!
 How seldom she complained and how often she had soothed his discontent!
 
 It was three years ago that she had come shyly to the schoolhouse and
 asked if she might borrow a book. He had known her, of course, before
 that, but had scarcely exchanged a dozen words with her. When he saw
 her, rarely, at church, Grandmother or Aunt Matilda was always with her,
 and the Starrs had had nothing to do with the Marshs for several years
 past, as Mrs. Marsh had been remiss in her social obligations.
 
 [Sidenote: A Growing Interest]
 
 At first, Rosemary had been purely negative to him, and he regarded her
 with kindly indifference. The girl's personality seemed as ashen as her
 hair, as colourless as her face. Her dull eyes seemed to see nothing, to
 care for nothing. Within the last few months he had begun to wonder
 whether her cold and impassive exterior might not be the shield with
 which she protected an abnormal sensitiveness. Now and then he had
 longed to awaken the woman who dwelt securely within the forbidding
 fortress--to strike from the flint some stray gleams of soul.
 
 Of late he had begun to miss her, and, each afternoon, to look with a
 little more conscious eagerness for the scarlet thread on the hill-top
 signalling against the grey sky beyond. His interest in her welfare was
 becoming more surely personal, not merely human. During the Winter,
 though he had seen her only twice, he had thought about her a great
 deal, and had written to her several times without expecting an answer.
 
 The iron bars of circumstance which bound her, had, though less
 narrowly, imprisoned him also. It seemed permanent for them both, and,
 indeed, the way of escape was even more definitely closed for Rosemary
 than for him.
 
 [Sidenote: A New Rosemary]
 
 He sighed as he rose and brushed the chalk from his clothes. Through
 force of habit, he looked up to the crest of the Hill of the Muses as he
 locked the door. The red ribbon fluttered like an oriflamme against the
 blue-and-white of the April sky. His heart quickened its beat a little
 as he saw it, and his steps insensibly hastened as he began to climb the
 hill.
 
 When he took her hand, with a word of friendly greeting, he noticed a
 change in her, though she had made a valiant effort to recover her
 composure. This was a new Rosemary, with eyes shining and the colour
 flaming in her cheeks and lips.
 
 "Spring seems to have come to you, too," he said, seating himself on the
 log beside her. "How well you look!"
 
 The deep crimson mounted to her temples, then as swiftly retreated.
 "Better take down the ribbon," she suggested, practically.
 
 "I've been watching a long time for this," he resumed, as he folded it
 and restored it to its place in the hollow tree. "What have you been
 doing?"
 
 "All the usual dreary things, to which a mountain of sewing has been
 added."
 
 "Is that a new gown?"
 
 She laughed, mirthlessly. "It's as new a gown as I'll ever have," she
 returned, trying to keep her voice even. "My wardrobe consists of an
 endless parade of brown alpaca and brown gingham garments, all made
 exactly alike."
 
 [Sidenote: Thwarted on All Sides]
 
 "Like a dozen stage soldiers, marching in and out, to create the
 illusion of a procession?"
 
 "I suppose so. You know I've never seen a stage, much less a stage
 soldier."
 
 Alden's heart softened with pity. He longed to take Rosemary to town and
 let her feast her eyes upon some gorgeous spectacle; to see her senses
 run riot, for once, with colour and light and sound.
 
 "I feel sometimes," she was saying, "as though I had sold my soul for
 pretty things in some previous existence, and was paying the penalty for
 it now."
 
 "You love pretty things, don't you?"
 
 She turned brimming eyes toward him. "Love them?" she repeated,
 brokenly. "There aren't words enough to say how much!"
 
 From a fresh point of view he saw her countless deprivations, binding
 her, thwarting her, oppressing her on all sides by continual denial. His
 own rebellion against circumstances seemed weak and unworthy.
 
 "Whenever I think of you," he said, in a different tone, "I feel ashamed
 of myself. I have freedom, of a certain sort, and you've never had a
 chance to learn the meaning of the word. You're dominated, body and
 soul, by a couple of old women who haven't discovered, as yet, that the
 earth is round and not flat."
 
 [Sidenote: Freedom]
 
 "My soul isn't bound," returned Rosemary, softly, "but it would have
 been, if it hadn't been for you."
 
 "I? Why, my dear girl, what have I done?"
 
 "Everything. Think of all the books you've loaned me, all the candles
 you've given me--all the times you've climbed this steep hill just to
 talk to me for an hour and give me new strength to go on."
 
 "It's only selfishness, Rosemary. I knew you were here and I like to
 talk to you. Don't forget that you've meant something to me, too. Why,
 you're the only woman I know, except my mother."
 
 "Your mother is lovely," she returned. "I wish I could go to see her
 once in a while. I like to look at her. Even her voice is different
 someway."
 
 "Yes, mother is 'different,'" he agreed, idly. "It's astonishing,
 sometimes, how 'different' she manages to be. We had it out the other
 day, about the vineyard, and I'm to stay here--all the rest of my life,"
 he concluded bitterly.
 
 "I don't see why, if you don't want to," she answered, half-fearfully.
 "You're a man, and men can do as they please."
 
 "It probably seems so to you, but I assure you it's very far from the
 truth. I wonder, now and then, if any of us ever really do as we please.
 Freedom is the great gift."
 
 [Sidenote: Choosing]
 
 "And the great loneliness," she added, after a pause.
 
 "You may be right," he sighed. "Still, I'd like to try it for a while.
 It's the one thing I'd choose. What would you take, if you could have
 anything you wanted?"
 
 "Do you mean for just a little while, or for always?"
 
 "For always. The one great gift you'd choose from all that Life has to
 give."
 
 "I'd take love," she said, in a low tone. She was not looking at him
 now, but far across the valley where the vineyard lay. Her face was
 wistful in the half-light; the corners of her mouth quivered, ever so
 little.
 
 Alden looked at her, then rubbed his eyes and looked at her again. In
 some subtle way she had changed, or he had, since they last met. Never
 before had he thought of her as a woman; she had been merely another
 individual to whom he liked to talk. To-day her womanhood carried its
 own appeal. She was not beautiful and no one would ever think her so,
 but she was sweet and wholesome and had a new, indefinable freshness
 about her that, in another woman, would have been called charm.
 
 It came to him, all at once, that, in some mysterious way, he and
 Rosemary belonged together. They had been born to the same lot, and must
 spend all their days in the valley, hedged in by the same narrow
 restrictions. Even an occasional hour on the Hill of the Muses was
 forbidden to her, and constant scheming was the price she was obliged to
 pay for it.
 
 [Sidenote: The Book]
 
 The restraint chafed and fretted him, for her as much as for himself. It
 was absurd that a girl of twenty-five and a man of thirty should not
 have some little independence of thought and action. The silence
 persisted and finally became awkward.
 
 "It's the book," said Rosemary, with a forced laugh. She was
 endeavouring to brush her mood away as though it were an annoying
 cobweb. "I've grown foolish over the book."
 
 "I'm glad you liked it," he returned, taking it from her. "I was sure
 you would. What part of it did you like best?"
 
 "All of it. I can't choose, though of course some of it seems more
 beautiful than the rest."
 
 "I suppose you know it by heart, now, don't you?"
 
 "Almost."
 
 "Listen. Isn't this like to-day?"
 
       "Spring's foot half falters; scarce she yet may know
       The leafless blackthorn-blossom from the snow;
     And through her bowers the wind's way still is clear."
 
 Rosemary got to her feet unsteadily. She went to the brow of the hill,
 on the side farthest from the vineyard, and stood facing the sunset.
 Scarcely knowing that she had moved, Alden read on:
 
     "But April's sun strikes down the glades to-day;
       So shut your eyes upturned, and feel my kiss----"
 
 [Sidenote: Alden Speaks]
 
 A smothered sob made him look up quickly. She stood with her back to
 him, but her shoulders were shaking. He dropped the book and went to
 her.
 
 A strange, new tenderness possessed him. "Rosemary," he whispered,
 slipping his arm around her. "What is it--dear?"
 
 "Nothing," she sobbed, trying to release herself. "I'm--I'm tired--and
 foolish--that's all. Please let me go!"
 
 Something within him stirred in answer to the girl's infinite hunger, to
 the unspoken appeal that vibrated through her voice. "No," he said, with
 quiet mastery, "I won't let you go. I want to take care of you,
 Rosemary. Leave all that misery and come to me, won't you?"
 
 Her eyes met his for an instant, then turned away. "I don't
 quite--understand," she said, with difficulty.
 
 "I'm asking you to marry me--to come to mother and me. We'll make the
 best of it together."
 
 Her eyes met his clearly now, but her face was pale and cold. She was
 openly incredulous and frightened.
 
 [Sidenote: Her Birthright]
 
 "I mean it, dear. Don't be afraid. Oh, Rosemary, can't you trust me?"
 
 "Trust you? Yes, a thousand times, yes!"
 
 He drew her closer. "And love me--a little?"
 
 "Love you?" The last light shone upon her face and the colour surged
 back in waves. She seemed exalted, transfigured, as by a radiance that
 shone from within.
 
 He put his hand under her chin and lifted her face to his. "Kiss me,
 won't you, dear?"
 
 And so, Rosemary came to her woman's birthright, in the shelter of a
 man's arms.
 
 
 
 
 V
 
 The House of the Broken Heart
 
 
 [Sidenote: Climbing in the Dark]
 
 The road was steep and very dark, but some unseen Power compelled her to
 climb. Dimly, through the shadow, she saw shafts of broken marbles and
 heard the sound of slow-falling waters. The desolation oppressed her,
 and, as she climbed, she pressed her hands tightly to her heart.
 
 She was alone in an empty world. All traces of human occupation had long
 since vanished. Brambles and thorns grew thickly about her, and her
 brown gingham dress was torn to shreds. Rosemary shuddered in her dream,
 for Grandmother and Aunt Matilda would be displeased.
 
 And yet, where were they? She had not seen them since she entered the
 darkness below. At first she had been unable to see anything, for the
 darkness was not merely absence of light but had a positive, palpable
 quality, it enshrouded her as by heavy folds of black velvet that
 suffocated her, but, as she climbed, the air became lighter and the
 darkness less.
 
 [Sidenote: The Path in the Garden]
 
 She longed to stop for a few moments and rest, but the pitiless Power
 continually urged her on. Bats fluttered past her and ghostly wings
 brushed her face, but, strangely, she had no fear. As her eyes became
 accustomed to the all-encompassing night, she saw into it for a little
 distance on either side, but never ahead.
 
 On the left was a vast, empty garden, neglected and dead. The hedge that
 surrounded it was only a tangled mass of undergrowth, and the paths were
 buried and choked by weeds. The desolate house beyond it loomed up
 whitely in the shadow. It was damp and cold in the garden, but she went
 in, mutely obeying the blind force that impelled her to go.
 
 She struggled up the path that led to the house, falling once into a
 mass of thistles that pricked and stung. The broken marbles, as she saw
 now, were statues that had been placed about the garden and had fallen
 into decay. The slow-falling water was a fountain that still murmured,
 choked though it was by the dense undergrowth.
 
 One of the steps that led to the house had fallen inward, so she put her
 knee on the one above that and climbed up. She tested each step of the
 long flight carefully before she trusted herself to it. When she reached
 the broad porch, her footsteps echoed strangely upon the floor. Each
 slight sound was caught up and repeated until it sounded like the tread
 of a marching army, vanishing into the distance.
 
 [Sidenote: The Desolate House]
 
 The heavy door creaked on its hinges when she opened it. That sound,
 too, echoed and re-echoed in rhythmic pulsations that beat painfully
 upon her ears, but, after she was once inside, all the clamour ceased.
 
 She could see clearly now, though it was still dark. A long, wide
 stairway wound up from the hall, and there were two great rooms upon
 either side. She turned into the wide doorway at the right.
 
 Windows, grey with cobwebs, stretched from floor to ceiling, but very
 little light came through them. The wall paper, of indistinguishable
 pattern, was partially torn from the walls and the hanging portions
 swayed in the same current of air that waved the cobwebs. There was no
 furniture of any description in the room, except the heavy, gilt-framed
 mirror over the mantel. It was cracked and much of the gilt frame had
 fallen away. She went into the next room, then into the one beyond that,
 which seemed to stretch across the back of the house, and so through the
 door at the left of the room into the two on the other side of the
 house, at the left of the hall.
 
 In the centre of the largest room was a small table, upon which rested
 a small object covered with a dome-shaped glass shade, precisely like
 that which covered the basket of wax flowers in Grandmother's parlour.
 Rosemary went to it with keen interest and leaned over the table to peer
 in.
 
 [Sidenote: The Broken Heart]
 
 At first she could see nothing, for the glass was cloudy. She noted,
 with a pang of disgust, that the table-cover was made of brown alpaca,
 fringed all around by the fabric itself, cut unskilfully into shreds
 with the scissors. As she looked, the glass slowly cleared.
 
 The small object was heart-shaped and made of wax in some dull colour
 half-way between red and brown. At length she saw that it was broken and
 the pieces had been laid together, carefully. Unless she had looked very
 closely she would not have seen that it was broken.
 
 Suddenly she felt a Presence in the room, and looked up quickly, with
 terror clutching at her inmost soul. A tall, grey figure, mysteriously
 shrouded, stood motionless beside her. Only the eyes were unveiled and
 visible amid the misty folds of the fabric.
 
 The eyes held her strangely. They were deep and dark and burning with
 secret fires. Hunger and longing were in their depths, and yet there was
 a certain exaltation, as of hope persisting against the knowledge of
 defeat.
 
 Rosemary's terror gradually vanished. She felt an all-pervading
 calmness, a sense of acceptance, of fulfilment.
 
 [Sidenote: Not of One's Own Choice]
 
 For a long time she stood there, transfixed by the eyes that never for
 an instant wavered from hers. They searched her inmost soul; they saw
 all things past and to come. They questioned her, challenged her, urged
 something upon her, and yet she was not afraid.
 
 At last, with dry lips, she spoke. "Who are you?" She did not recognise
 the sound of her own voice.
 
 "The Lord of Life," the figure answered, in low, deep tones that
 vibrated through the empty rooms like the swept strings of a harp.
 
 "And this is--?"
 
 "The House of the Broken Heart. I live here."
 
 "Why?" she asked.
 
 "Not of my own choice. Why have you come?"
 
 "Not of my own choice," she repeated, dully. "I came because I had to."
 
 "They all do. That is why I myself am here."
 
 "Do--do many come?"
 
 "Yes."
 
 Rosemary looked back over her shoulder, then lifted her eyes to those of
 the grey figure. "Then it is strange," she said, "that I am here alone."
 
 "You are not alone. These rooms are full, but no one sees another in
 the House of the Broken Heart. Each one is absorbed in his own grief to
 the exclusion of all else. Only I may see them, with bowed heads, pacing
 to and fro.
 
 [Sidenote: Selfish Grief]
 
 "On the stairway," he went on, "is a young mother who has lost her
 child. She goes up and down endlessly, thinking first she hears it
 crying for her in the room above, and then in the room below. Her
 husband sits at the foot of the stairs with his face hidden in his
 hands, but she has no thought for him. He has lost wife and child too."
 
 "Poor man!" said Rosemary, softly. "Poor woman!"
 
 "Yonder is a grey-haired woman, reaping the bitterness that she has
 sown. There are a husband and wife who have always been jealous of one
 another, and will be, until the end of time. There is a girl who has
 trusted and been betrayed, but she will go out again when her courage
 comes back. Just behind you is a woman who has estranged her husband
 from his family and has found his heart closed to her in the hour of her
 greatest need. Coming toward you is a man who was cruel to his wife, and
 never knew it until after she was dead."
 
 "But," Rosemary asked, "is there no punishment?"
 
 "None whatever, except this. The consciousness of a sin is its own
 punishment."
 
 [Sidenote: Some One Gift]
 
 She stood there perplexed, leaning against the table. "Have all who are
 here, then, sinned?"
 
 "No, some have been sinned against, and a few, like yourself, have come
 in by mistake."
 
 "Then I may go?"
 
 The Lord of Life bent his head graciously. "Whenever you choose. You
 have only to take your gift and depart."
 
 "Is there a gift here for me? Nobody ever gave me anything."
 
 "Some one gift is yours for the asking, and, because you have not
 sinned, you have the right to choose. What shall it be?"
 
 "Love," returned Rosemary, very wistfully. "Oh, give me love!"
 
 The Lord of Life sighed. "So many ask for that," he said. "They all
 confuse the end with the means. What they really want is joy, but they
 ask for love."
 
 "Is there a greater joy than love?"
 
 "No, but love in itself is not joy. It is always service and it may be
 sacrifice. It means giving, not receiving; asking, not answer."
 
 "None the less," said Rosemary, stubbornly, "I will take love."
 
 "They all do," he returned. "Wait."
 
 He vanished so quickly that she could not tell which way he had gone. As
 she leaned against the table, the brown alpaca cover slipped back on the
 marble table and the glass case tottered. She caught it hurriedly and
 saved it from falling, but the waxen pieces of the heart quivered
 underneath.
 
 [Sidenote: The Symbol of Hope]
 
 The grey figure was coming back, muffled to the eyes as before, but his
 footsteps made no sound. He moved slowly, yet with a certain authority.