He laid a letter on the table 

 and Rosemary snatched it up eagerly. It was 

 addressed to Mrs. Virginia Marsh. 

 

 "That is not for me," she said, much dis 

 appointed. "My name is Rosemary Starr." 

 

 "It must have something to do with you," 

 he returned, unmoved. "However, I will 

 keep it until the owner comes." 

 

 "She doesn t belong here," Rosemary 

 answered, somewhat resentfully. "She s the 

 dearest, sweetest woman in the world. She s 

 Alden s mother." 

 

 "The one who wrote it may be here, or 

 coming," he explained, patiently. "Some 

 times it happens that way. There are many 

 letters in this place." 

 

 As he spoke, he placed a green wreath upon 

 Rosemary s head and gave her a white lily, 

 on a long stem. "Go," he said, kindly. 

 

 "But my gift?" 

 

 "Go and find it. Carry your symbol of 

 Hope and wear your wreath of rue. You will 

 come to it." 

 

 "But where? How shall I go from here? 

 I m afraid I shall lose my way."


 

 ZTbe Ifoouse of tbe JSrofeen Ibeart 

 

 The stern eyes fixed themselves upon her 

 steadily. "Do not question Life too much," 

 he warned her. "Accept it. Have I not 

 told you to go?" 

 

 Her fear suddenly returned. She went 

 backward, slowly, toward the door, away from 

 the table and the tall grey figure that stood 

 by it, holding the letter addressed to Mrs. 

 Virginia Marsh. When she was outside, she 

 drew a long breath of relief. It was daybreak, 

 and grey lights on the far horizon foreshadowed 

 the sunrise. 

 

 She ran down the steps, stumbling as she 

 passed the broken one, and went hurriedly 

 down the weed-choked path. The broken 

 marble statues were green with mould and the 

 falling waters seemed to move with difficulty, 

 like the breath of one about to die. The still 

 ness of the place was vast and far-reaching; 

 it encompassed her as the night had previously 

 done. 

 

 She soon found the trail that led upward, 

 though she did not recognise the point at 

 which she had turned into the garden. She 

 had no doubt, now, about the path she must 

 take. It led up, up, through thorns and 

 brambles, past the crags upon which the first 

 light shone, and around the crest of the peak 

 to what? Drawing a long breath, Rosemary 

 started, carrying her lily and wearing her 

 wreath of rue.


 

 70 /iDaster of tbe IDi 

 

 The brown gingham hung in tatters and her 

 worn shoes threatened to drop from her feet, 

 but the divine fragrance of the lily she bore 

 sustained her as she climbed. She was glad 

 she had chosen as she had, though his words 

 still puzzled her. "It is always service," she 

 repeated, "and it may be sacrifice. It means 

 giving, not receiving; asking, not answer." 

 

 "And yet," she mused, "he said they all 

 asked for it. I should have taken the letter," 

 she continued, to herself. "Alden could have 

 given it to his mother." 

 

 It seemed strange to be thinking of him as 

 "Alden" instead of "Mr. Marsh," and yet it 

 was supremely sweet. She felt the colour 

 burning in her cheeks, for she knew, now, 

 that he awaited her, somewhere on the height. 

 Had he not chosen Love too? Were they not 

 to find it together? 

 

 Dull, prismatic fires glowed upon the distant 

 clouds dawn-jewels laid upon the breast of 

 Night. Violet and blue mellowed into opal 

 and turquoise, then, as the spectrum may 

 merge into white light, a shaft of sunrise 

 broke from the mysterious East, sending a 

 javelin of glory half-way across the world. 

 

 The first light lay upon the crags, then 

 deepened and spread, penetrating the darkness 

 below, which was no longer black, but dusky 

 purple. Rosemary s heart sang as she climbed, 

 and the fragrance of the lily thrilled her soul


 

 

 with pure delight. The path was smooth, 

 now, and thorns no longer hurt her feet. 

 The hand that held the lily, however, was 

 bleeding, from some sharp thorn or projection 

 of rock. 

 

 She wiped her hand upon her torn dress, 

 and, as she did so, a drop of blood stained the 

 lily. She tried to get it off, but all her efforts 

 were fruitless. The crimson spread and dark 

 ened until half of the white petals were dyed. 

 She noted, with a queer lump in her throat, 

 that the lily was the same colour as the waxen 

 heart that lay under the glass case in the house 

 she had so recently left. 

 

 But she still held it tightly, though it was 

 stained and no longer fragrant. Up some 

 where in the sunrise Alden was waiting for her, 

 and she climbed breathlessly. She was ex 

 hausted when she reached the summit, and 

 the wreath of rue pressed heavily upon her 

 temples. 

 

 She paused for a moment, realising that 

 she had reached the end of her journey. Rain 

 bow mists surrounded the height, but, as she 

 looked, they lifted. She was not surprised to 

 see Alden standing there. He had been hidden 

 by the mists. 

 

 With a little laugh of joy, Rosemary tried 

 to run toward him, but her feet refused to 

 move. Then she called: "Alden!" and again, 

 in a troubled tone: "Mr. Marsh!"


 

 Calling in 

 Uain 

 

 But only the echo of her own voice came 

 back to her, for Alden did not move. Strong 

 and finely-moulded, his youth surrounded him 

 like some radiant garment of immortality. 

 Every line of his figure was eloquent of his 

 lusty manhood, and his face glowed not only 

 from the sunrise, but from some inner light. 

 

 "Service, sacrifice. Giving, not receiving; 

 asking, not answer." The words reverber 

 ated through her consciousness like a funeral 

 knell. She dropped the stained lily and called 

 again, weakly: "Alden!" 

 

 But, as before, he did not answer. His 

 eyes were fixed upon a distant point where 

 the coloured mists were slowly lifting. Rose 

 mary, cold and still, could only stand there 

 and watch, for her feet refused to stir. 

 

 Hungrily, she gazed upon him, but he did 

 not see, for he was watching the drifting rain 

 bow beyond. Then a cry of rapture broke 

 from him and he started eagerly toward the 

 insurmountable crags that divided him from 

 the Vision. 

 

 Rosemary saw it, too, at the same instant 

 a woman whose white gown shimmered and 

 shone, and whose face was hidden by the 

 blinding glory of her sunlit hair. 

 

 She woke, murmuring his name, then rubbed 

 her eyes. It took her several minutes to real 

 ise that it was all a dream. She was in her


 

 

 own little room in the brown house, and the 

 sun was peeping through the shutters. The 

 holes in the rag carpet, the cheap, cracked 

 mirror, the braided mat in front of her wash- 

 stand, and the broken pitcher all contrived to 

 reassure her. 

 

 She sat up in bed, knowing that it was time 

 to get up, but desperately needing a few 

 moments in which to adjust herself to her 

 realities. What had happened? Nothing, in 

 deed, since yesterday ah, that dear yesterday, 

 when life had begun ! What could ever happen 

 now, when all the future lay fair before her 

 and the miseries of her twenty-five years were 

 overwhelmed by one deep intoxicating joy? 

 

 "Dreams," thought Rosemary, laughing to 

 herself. "Ah, what are dreams!" 

 

 She opened the shutters wide and the day 

 light streamed in. It was not fraught with 

 colour, like the mists of her dream, but was the 

 clear, sane light of every day. A robin outside 

 her window chirped cheerily, and a bluebird 

 flashed across the distant meadow, then 

 paused on the rushes at the bend of the river 

 and swayed there for a moment, like some 

 unfamiliar flower. 

 

 "Rosemary!" The shrill voice sounded just 

 outside her door. 

 

 "Yes, Aunt Matilda," she answered, hap 

 pily; " I m coming!" 

 

 She sang to herself as she moved about her


 

 74 /toaster of tbe IDinesaro 

 

 Service 

 ant&amp;gt; 

 

 room, loving the dear, common things of every 

 sacrifice day the splash of cool water on her face and 

 throat, the patchwork quilt, and even the de 

 spised brown gingham, which was, at least, 

 fresh and clean. 

 

 "Service," she said to herself, "and sac 

 rifice. Giving, not receiving; asking, and not 

 answer. I wonder if it s true!" For an 

 instant she was afraid, then her soul rallied as 

 to a bugle call. " Even so," she thought, " I 11 

 take it, and gladly. I 11 serve and sacrifice 

 and give, and never mind the answer." 

 

 She hurried downstairs, where the others 

 were waiting. "You re late, Rosemary," 

 said Grandmother, sourly. 

 

 "Yes, I know," laughed the girl, stooping 

 to kiss the withered cheek. "I m sorry! I 

 won t let it happen again!" 

 

 Out in the kitchen, she sang as she worked, 

 and the clatter of pots and pans kept up a 

 merry accompaniment. She had set the table 

 the night before, as usual, so it was not long 

 before she had breakfast ready. Her cheeks 

 were flushed and her eyes were shining when 

 she came in with the oatmeal. 

 

 "This is for you, Aunt Matilda it isn t 

 cooked quite so much. This is for you, Grand 

 mother. It s nice and soft, for I soaked it 

 over night. I 11 have the eggs ready in just 

 a minute." 

 

 When she went out, the other two exchanged


 

 ZTbe Tbouse of tbe JSroften tbeart 

 

 75 

 

 glances. "What," asked Grandmother, "do 

 you reckon has got into Rosemary?" 

 

 "I don t know," returned Aunt Matilda, 

 gloomily. "Do you suppose it s religion?" 

 

 " I ain t never seen religion affect anybody 

 like that, have you?" 

 

 "No, I ain t," Aunt Matilda admitted, after 

 a moment s pondering. 

 

 "She reminds me of her ma," said Grand 

 mother, reminiscently, " the day Frank brought 

 her home." 

 

 TObat t&amp;gt;as 

 fjappenefc?


 

 VI 

 

 Bttew 

 

 point of 

 

 View 

 

 fIDore Stately 

 

 THE new joy surged in every heart-beat 

 as Rosemary went up the Hill of the 

 Muses, late in the afternoon. Instinctively, 

 she sought the place of fulfilment, yearning 

 to be alone with the memory of yesterday. 

 

 Nothing was wrong in all the world; nothing 

 ever could be wrong any more. She accepted 

 the brown alpaca and the brown gingham as 

 she did the sordid tasks of every day. That 

 morning, for the first time, it had been a 

 pleasure to wash dishes and happiness to 

 build a fire. 

 

 Grandmother and Aunt Matilda had been 

 annoyances to her ever since she could remem 

 ber. Their continual nagging had fretted her, 

 their constant restraint had chafed her, their 

 narrowness had cramped her. To-day she 

 saw them from a new point of view. 

 

 Grandmother was no longer a malicious 

 spirit of evil who took delight in thwarting 

 her, but a poor, fretful old lady whose soul 

 was bound in shallows. And Aunt Matilda? 

 Rosemary s eyes filled at the thought of Aunt


 

 

 Matilda, unloved and unsought. Nobody 

 wanted her, she belonged to nobody, in all her 

 lonely life she had had nothing. She sat and 

 listened to Grandmother, she did the annual 

 sewing, and day by day resented more keenly 

 the emptiness of her life. It was the conscious 

 lack that made them both cross. Rosemary 

 saw it now, with the clear vision that had 

 come to her during the past twenty-four 

 hours. 

 

 She wanted to be very kind to Grandmother 

 and Aunt Matilda. It was not a philanthropic 

 resolution, but a spontaneous desire to share 

 her own gladness, and to lead the others, if 

 she might, from the chill darkness in which 

 they dwelt to the clear air of the heights. 

 

 Oh, but it was good to be alive! The little 

 birds that hopped from bough to bough 

 chirped ecstatically, the nine silver-clad birches 

 swayed and nodded in the cool wind, and the 

 peaceful river in the valley below sparkled and 

 dimpled at the caress of the sun. The thou 

 sand sounds and fragrances of Spring thrilled 

 her to eager answer; she, too, aspired and 

 yearned upward as the wakened grass-blades 

 pierced the sod and the violets of last year 

 dreamed once more of bloom. 

 

 Yesterday she had emerged from darkness 

 into light. She had been born again as surely 

 as the tiny dweller of the sea casts off his shell. 

 The outworn habitation of the past was for-


 

 /ffmster of tbe 

 

 Cbc 

 Same, JJct 

 Different 

 

 ever left behind her, to be swept back, by the 

 tides of the new life, into some forgotten cave. 

 

 " Build thee more stately mansions, oh my soul, 

 As the swift seasons roll." 

 

 The words said themselves aloud. She had 

 learned the whole poem long ago, but, to-day, 

 the beautiful lines assumed a fresh significance, 

 for had she not, by a single step, passed from 

 the cell of self into comradeship with the whole 

 world? Was she not a part of everything 

 and had not everything become a part of 

 her? What could go wrong when the finite 

 was once merged with the infinite, the individ 

 ual with the universal soul? 

 

 She sat down on the log that Alden had 

 rolled back against the two trees, three years 

 ago, when they had first begun to come to the 

 Hill of the Muses for an occasional hour of 

 friendly talk. Everything was the same, and 

 yet subtly different, as though seen from 

 another aspect or in another light. Over 

 yonder, on the hillside farthest from the valley, 

 he had put his arm around her and refused to 

 let her go. 

 

 She remembered vividly every word and 

 every look and that first shy kiss. Of course 

 they belonged together! How foolish they 

 had been not to see it before! Was she not 

 the only woman he knew, and was he not the


 

 

 79 

 

 only man to whom she could say more than 

 "How do you do?" God had meant it so 

 from the beginning, ever since He said: "Let 

 there be light, and there was light." 

 

 Dreaming happily, Rosemary sat on the 

 fallen tree, leaning against the great oak that 

 towered above her. The first pink leaves had 

 come out upon the brown branches, and 

 through them she could see the blue sky, deep 

 as turquoise, without a single cloud. It 

 seemed that she had always been happy, but 

 had never known it until this new light shone 

 upon her, flooding with divine radiance every 

 darkened recess of her soul. 

 

 She went to the hollow tree, took out the 

 wooden box, and unwound the scarlet ribbon. 

 Yesterday, little dreaming of the portent that 

 for once accompanied the signal, she had tied 

 it in its accustomed place, and gone back, 

 calmly to wait. The school bell echoed through 

 the valley as she stood there, her eyes laugh 

 ing, but her mouth very grave. She had 

 taken two or three steps toward the birches 

 when an unwonted shyness possessed her, and 

 she hurried back. 

 

 "I can t," she said to herself. "Oh, I 

 can t to-day!" 

 

 So she restored it to its place, wondering, 

 as she did so, why love should make such 

 mysterious changes in the common things of 

 every day. Won and awakened though she 

 

 Bn 

 Tflnwontefc 

 

 Sbgnegs


 

 /toaster ot tbe 

 

 TOaftfn.j was, her womanhood imperatively demanded 

 now that she must be sought and never seek, 

 that she must not even beckon him to her, and 

 that she must wait, according to her destiny, 

 as women have waited since the world began. 

 

 Yet it was part of the beautiful magic of the 

 day that presently he should come to her, 

 unsummoned save by her longing and his 

 own desire. 

 

 "Where is the ribbon?" he inquired, re 

 proachfully, when he came within speaking 

 distance. 

 

 "Where it belongs," she answered, with a 

 flush. 

 

 "Did n t you want me to come?" 

 

 "Of course." 

 

 "Then why did n t you hang it up?" 

 

 "Just because I wanted you to come." 

 

 Alden laughed at her feminine inconsistency, 

 as he took her face between his hands and 

 kissed her, half-shyly still. "Did you sleep 

 last night?" he asked. 

 

 "Yes, but I had a horrible dream. I was 

 glad to wake up this morning." 

 

 "I didn t sleep, so all my dreams were 

 wakeful ones. You re not sorry, are you, 

 Rosemary?" 

 

 "No, indeed! How could I ever be sorry?" 

 

 "You never shall be, if I can help it. I 

 want to be good to you, dear. If I m ever 

 otherwise, you 11 tell me so, won t you?"


 

 

 "Perhaps I won t promise." 

 

 "Why not?" 

 

 "Because, even if you were n t good to me, 

 I d know you never meant it." Rosemary s 

 eyes were grave and sweet; eloquent, as they 

 were, of her perfect trust in him. 

 

 He laughed again. " I d be a brute not 

 to be good to you, whether I meant it or 

 not." 

 

 "That sounds twisted," she commented, 

 with a smile. 

 

 "But it is n t, as long as you know what I 

 mean." 

 

 "I ll always know," sighed Rosemary, 

 blissfully leaning her head against his shoulder. 

 " I 11 always understand and I 11 never fail 

 you. That s because I love you better than 

 everything else in the world." 

 

 "Dear little saint," he murmured; "you re 

 too good for me." 

 

 "No, I m not. On the contrary, I m not 

 half good enough." Then, after a pause, she 

 asked the old, old question, first always from 

 the lips of the woman beloved: "When did 

 you begin to care?" 

 

 "I must have cared when we first began to 

 come here, only I was so blind I did n t know 

 it." 

 

 "When did you know?" 

 

 "Yesterday. I didn t keep it to myself 

 very long."


 

 82 

 

 Dear yesterday ! she breathed, half regret- 

 

 SballUt . ,, J J 

 

 fully. 

 

 "Do you want it back?" 

 

 She turned reproachful eyes upon him. 

 "Why should I want yesterday when I have 

 to-day?" 

 

 "And to-morrow," he supplemented, "and 

 all the to-morrows to come." 

 

 "Together," she said, with a swift realisation 

 of the sweetness underlying the word. " Yes 

 terday was perfect, like a jewel that we can 

 put away and keep. When we want to, we can 

 always go back and look at it." 

 

 "No, dear," he returned, soberly; "no one 

 can ever go back to yesterday." Then, with 

 a swift change of mood, he asked: "When shall 

 we be married?" 

 

 "Whenever you like," she whispered, her 

 eyes downcast and her colour receding. 

 

 "In the Fall, then, when the grapes have 

 been gathered and just before school begins?" 

 

 He could scarcely hear her murmured: 

 "Yes." 

 

 " I want to take you to town and let you 

 see things. Theatres, concerts, operas, parks, 

 shops, art galleries, everything. If the crop is 

 in early, we should be able to have two weeks. 

 Do you think you could crowd all the lost 

 opportunities of a lifetime into two weeks?" 

 

 "Into a day, with you." 

 

 He drew her closer. This sort of thing was


 

 

 very sweet to him, and the girl s dull person 

 ality had bloomed like some pale, delicate 

 flower. He saw unfathomed depths in her 

 grey eyes, shining now, with the indescribable 

 light that comes from within. She had been 

 negative and colourless, but now she was a 

 lovely mystery a half-blown windflower on 

 some brown, bare hillside, where Life, in all its 

 fulness, was yet to come. 

 

 "Did you tell your Grandmother and Aunt 

 Matilda?" 

 

 "No. How could I?" 

 

 " You d better not. They d only make it 

 hard for you, and I would n t be allowed in the 

 parlour anyway." 

 

 Rosemary had not thought of that. It was 

 only that her beautiful secret was too sacred 

 to put into words. "They 11 have to know 

 some time," she temporised. 

 

 " Yes, of course, but not until the last minute. 

 The day we re to be married, you can just 

 put on your hat and say: Grandmother, and 

 Aunty, I m going out now, to be married to 

 Alden Marsh. 1 shan t be back, so good-bye." 

 

 She laughed, but none the less the idea filled 

 her with consternation. "What will they 

 

 say 

 

 " she exclaimed. 

 

 "It does n t matter what they say, as long 

 as you re not there to hear it." 

 

 "Clothes," she said, half to herself. "I 

 can t be married in brown alpaca, can I?"


 

 8 4 

 

 flDaster of tbe IDine^aro 

 

 "I don t know why not. We ll take the 

 ; ; fatal step as early as possible in the morning, 

 catch the first train to town, you can shop all 

 the afternoon to your heart s content, and be 

 dressed like a fine lady in time for dinner in the 

 evening." 

 

 "Grandmother was married in brown al 

 paca," she continued, irrelevantly, "and 

 Aunt Matilda wore it the night the minister 

 came to call." 

 

 "Did he never come again?" 

 

 "No. Do you think it could have been the 

 alpaca?" 

 

 "I m sure it wasn t. Aunt Matilda was 

 foreordained to be an old maid." 

 

 "She won t allow anyone to speak of her 

 as an old maid. She says she s a spinster." 

 

 "What s the difference?" 

 

 "I think," returned Rosemary, pensively, 

 " that an old maid is a woman who never could 

 have married and a spinster is merely one who 

 has n t." 

 

 "Is it a question of opportunity?" 

 

 " I believe so." 

 

 "Then you re wrong, because some of the 

 worst old maids I ve ever known have been 

 married women. I ve seen men, too, who 

 deserve the title." 

 

 "Poor Aunt Matilda," Rosemary sighed; 

 " I m sorry for her." 

 

 "Why?"


 

 /Bore Stately ADansfons 

 

 "Because she hasn t anyone to love her 

 because she has n t you. I m sorry for every 

 other woman in the world," she concluded, 

 generously, "because I have you all to 

 myself." 

 

 "Sweet," he answered, possessing himself 

 of her hand, "don t forget that you must 

 divide me with mother." 

 

 "I won t. Will she care, do you think, 

 because Her voice trailed off into an indis 

 tinct murmur. 

 

 "Of course not. She s glad. I told her 

 this morning." 

 

 "Oh!" cried Rosemary, suddenly tremulous 

 and afraid. "What did she say?" 

 

 "She was surprised at first." Alden care 

 fully refrained from saying how much his 

 mother had been surprised and how long it had 

 been before she found herself equal to the 

 occasion. 

 

 "Yes and then?" 

 

 "Then she said she was glad; that she 

 wanted me to be happy. She told me that 

 she had always liked you and that the house 

 would n t be so lonely after you came to live 

 with us. Then she asked me to bring you to see 

 her, as soon as you were ready to come." 

 

 The full tide overflowed in the girl s heart. 

 She yearned toward Mrs. Marsh with worship, 

 adoration, love. The mother-hunger made her 

 faint with longing for a woman s arms around


 

 86 

 

 /Caster of tbe 

 

 flDaCame s 

 TOlclcome 

 

 her, for a woman s tears of joy to mingle with 

 her own. 

 

 "Take me to her," Rosemary pleaded. 

 "Take me now!" 

 

 Madame saw them coming and went to the 

 door to meet them. Rosemary was not at all 

 what she had fancied in the way of a daughter- 

 in-law, but, wisely, she determined to make 

 the best of Alden s choice. Something in her 

 stirred in answer to the infinite appeal in the 

 girl s eyes. At the crowning moment of her 

 life, Rosemary stood alone, fatherless, mother 

 less, friendless, with only brown alpaca to take 

 the place of all the pretty things that seem 

 girlhood s right. 

 

 Madame smiled, then opened her arms. 

 Without a word, Rosemary went to her, laid 

 her head upon the sweet, silken softness of the 

 old lady s shoulder, and began to cry softly. 

 

 "Daughter," whispered Madame, holding 

 her close. "My dear daughter! Please 

 don t!" 

 

 Rosemary laughed through her tears, then 

 wiped her eyes. "It s only an April rain," 

 she said. " I m crying because I m so 

 happy." 

 

 "I wish," responded Madame, gently, with 

 a glance at her son, " that I might be sure all 

 the tears either of you are ever to shed would 

 be tears of joy. It s the bitterness that 

 hurts."


 

 Stately Mansions 

 

 "Don t be pessimistic, Mother," said Alden, 

 with a little break in his voice. Rosemary s 

 tears woke all his tenderness. He longed to 

 shield and shelter her; to stand, if he might, 

 between her and the thousand pricks and 

 stabs of the world. 

 

 "We ll have tea," Madame went on, 

 brightly, ringing a silver bell as she spoke. 

 "Then we shan t be quite so serious." 

 

 "Woman s inevitable solace," Alden ob 

 served, lounging about the room with his hands 

 in his pockets. Man-like, he welcomed the 

 change of mood. 

 

 " I wonder," he continued, with forced 

 cheerfulness, "why people always cry at 

 weddings and engagements and such things? 

 A husband or wife is the only relative we are 

 permitted to choose we even have very little 

 to say when it comes to a mother-in-law. 

 With parents, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, 

 and cousins all provided by a generous but 

 sometimes indiscriminating Fate, it seems 

 hard that one s only choice should be made 

 unpleasant by salt water. 

 

 "Why," he went on, warming to his sub 

 ject, " I remember how a certain woman 

 angled industriously for months to capture an 

 unsuspecting young man for her daughter. 

 When she finally landed him, and the cere 

 mony came off to the usual accompaniment 

 of Mendelssohn and a crowded church, I


 

 88 

 

 faster ot tbe tflineparfc 

 

 B 

 

 Contrast 

 

 feared that the bridal couple might have to 

 come down the aisle from the altar in a canoe, 

 on account of the maternal tears." 

 

 "Perhaps," suggested Rosemary, timidly, 

 "she was only crying because she was happy." 

 

 "If she was as happy as all those tears 

 would indicate, it s a blessed wonder she 

 did n t burst." 

 

 Madame smiled fondly at her son as she 

 busied herself with the tea things. Rosemary 

 watched the white, plump hands that moved 

 so gracefully among the cups, and her heart 

 contracted with a swift little pang of envy, of 

 which she was immediately ashamed. Uncon 

 sciously, she glanced at her own rough, red 

 hands. Madame saw the look, and under 

 stood. 

 

 "We ll soon fix them, my dear," she said, 

 kindly. " I 11 show you how to take care of 

 them." 

 

 "Really?" cried Rosemary, gratefully. 

 "Oh, thank you! Do you suppose that 

 that they 11 ever look like yours?" 

 

 "Wait and see," Madame temporised. She 

 was fond of saying that it took three genera 

 tions of breeding to produce the hand of a 

 lady. 

 

 The kettle began to sing and the cover 

 danced cheerily. Tiny clouds of steam trailed 

 off into space, disappearing in the late after 

 noon sunshine like a wraith at dawn. Madame


 

 /iDore Statelg Mansions 

 

 filled the blue china tea-pot and the subtle 

 fragrance permeated the room. 

 

 "Think," she said, as she waited the allotted 

 five minutes for it to steep, "of all I give you 

 in a cup of tea. See the spicy, sunlit fields, 

 where men, women, and children, in little 

 jackets of faded blue, pick it while their 

 queues bob back and forth. Think of all the 

 chatter that goes in with the picking marriage 

 and birth and death and talk of houses and 

 worldly possessions, and everything else that 

 we speak of here. 

 

 "Then the long, sweet drying, and the pack 

 ing in dim storehouses, and then the long 

 journey. Sand and heat and purple dusk, 

 tinkle of bells and scent of myrrh, the rustle of 

 silks and the gleam of gold. Then the 

 open sea, with infinite spaces of shining 

 blue, and a wake of pearl and silver follow 

 ing the ship. Dreams and moonbeams and 

 starry twilights, from the other side of the 

 world here, my dear, I give them all to 

 you." 

 

 She offered Rosemary the cup as she con 

 cluded and the girl smiled back at her happily. 

 This was all so different from the battered 

 metal tea-pot that always stood on the back 

 of the stove at Grandmother s, to be boiled 

 and re-boiled until the colour was gone from 

 the leaves. Alden was looking into his cup 

 with assumed anxiety.


 

 flDaster of tbe lt)fne$ar& 

 

 In tbe 

 

 Sottom of 

 

 tbe Cup 

 

 "What s the matter, dear?" asked his 

 mother. " Is n t it right?" 

 

 "I was looking for the poem," he laughed, 

 "and I see nothing but a stranger." 

 

 "Coming?" she asked, idly. 

 

 "Of course. See?" 

 

 " You re right a stranger and trouble. 

 What is there in your cup, Rosemary?" 

 

 "Nothing at all," she answered, with a 

 smile, "but a little bit of sugar just a few 

 grains." 

 

 Alden came and looked over her shoulder. 

 Then, with his arm over the back of her chair, 

 he pressed his cheek to hers. "I hope, my 

 dear, that whenever you come to the dregs, 

 you 11 always have that much sweetness left." 

 

 Rosemary, flushed and embarrassed, made 

 her adieus awkwardly. "Come again very 

 soon, dear, won t you?" asked Madame. 

 

 "Yes, indeed, if I may, and thank you so 

 much. Good-bye, Mrs. Marsh." 

 

 " Mrs. Marsh? " repeated the old lady, 

 reproachfully. Some memory of her lost Vir 

 ginia made her very tender toward the mother 

 less girl. 

 

 "May I?" Rosemary faltered. "Do you 

 mean it?" 

 

 Madame smiled and lifted her beautiful 

 old face. Rosemary stooped and kissed her. 

 "Mother," she said, for the first time in her 

 life. "Dear Mother! Good-bye!"


 

 VII 

 

 a letter ant) a (Bueet 

 

 " A LETTER for you, Mother." Alden tossed 

 

 f~\ a. violet-scented envelope into the old 

 

 lady s lap as he spoke, and stood there, waiting. 

 

 "For me!" she exclaimed. Letters for 

 either of them were infrequent. She took it 

 up curiously, scrutinised the address, sniffed 

 at the fragrance the missive carried, noted 

 the postmark, which was that of the town 

 near by, and studied the waxen purple seal, 

 stamped with indistinguishable initials. 

 

 "I haven t the faintest idea whom it s 

 from," she said, helplessly. 

 

 "Why not open it and see?" he suggested, 

 with kindly sarcasm. His assumed careless 

 ness scarcely veiled his own interest in it. 

 

 "You always were a bright boy, Alden," 

 she laughed. Another woman might have 

 torn it open rudely, but Madame searched 

 through her old mahogany desk until she 

 found a tarnished silver letter-opener, thus 

 according due courtesy to her unknown 

 correspondent. 

 

 Having opened it, she discovered that she


 

 flDaster of tbe IDineparfc 

 

 B 

 TKHoman 6 

 

 Writing 

 

 could not read the handwriting, which was 

 angular and involved beyond the power of 

 words to indicate. 

 

 "Here," she said. "Your eyes are better 

 than mine." 

 

 Alden took it readily. "My eyes may be 

 good," he observed, after a long pause, "but 

 my detective powers are not. The m s and n s 

 are all alike, and so are most of the other letters. 

 She s an economical person she makes the 

 same hieroglyphic do duty for both a g and 

 ay." 

 

 "It s from a woman, then?" 

 

 "Certainly. Did you ever know a man to 

 sprawl a note all over two sheets of paper, 

 with nothing to distinguish the end from the 

 beginning? In the nature of things, you d 

 expect her to commence at the top of a sheet, 

 and, in a careless moment, she may have done 

 so. Let me see yes, here it is: My dear 

 Mrs. Marsh. " 

 

 "Go on, please," begged Madame, after a 

 silence. "It was just beginning to be inter 

 esting." 

 

 " During my mother s last illness/" Alden 

 read, with difficulty, " she told me that if I 

 were ever in trouble, I should go to you that 

 you would stand in her place to me. I write 

 to ask if I may come, for I can no longer see 

 the path ahead of me, and much less do I know 

 the way in which I should go.


 

 

 "You surely remember her. She was 

 Louise Lane before her marriage to my father, 

 Edward Archer. 

 

 "Please send me a line or two, telling me 

 I may come, if only for a day. Believe me, 

 no woman ever needed a friendly hand to 

 guide her more than 

 

 " Yours unhappily, 

 

 "EDITH ARCHER LEE." 

 

 "Louise Lane," murmured Madame, remi- 

 niscently. "My old schoolmate! 1 did n t even 

 know that she had a daughter, or that she was 

 dead. How strangely we lose track of one 

 another in this world!" 

 

 "Yes?" said Alden, encouragingly. 

 

 "Louise was a beautiful girl," continued 

 Madame, half to herself. "She had big brown 

 eyes, with long lashes, a thick, creamy skin 

 that someway reminded you of white rose- 

 petals, and the most glorious red hair you ever 

 saw. She married an actor, and I heard 

 indirectly that she had gone on the stage, then 

 I lost her entirely." 

 

 "Yes?" said Alden, again. 

 

 "Edith Archer Lee," Madame went on. 

 "She must be married. Think of Louise Lane 

 having a daughter old enough to be married! 

 And yet my Virginia would have been 

 thirty-two now. Dear me, how the time 

 goes by!"


 

 94 

 

 

 The tall clock on the landing chimed five 

 deep, musical strokes, the canary hopped rest 

 lessly about his gilt cage, and the last light of 

 the sweet Spring afternoon, searching the soft 

 shadows of the room, found the crystal ball 

 on the table and made merry with it. 

 

 "Time is still going by," Alden reminded 

 her. "What are you going to do?" 

 

 Madame started from her reverie. "Do? 

 Why, she must come, of course!" 

 

 " I don t see why," Alden objected, gloomily. 

 "I don t like strange women." 

 

 " It is not a question of what we like or don t 

 like, my son," she returned, in gentle reproof. 

 "She is in trouble and she needs something we 

 can give her." 

 

 "When people are in trouble, they usually 

 want either money or sympathy, or both." 

 

 "Sometimes they only need advice." 

 

 "There are lots of places where they can get 

 it. Advice is as free as salvation is said to be." 

 

 Madame sighed. Then she crossed the 

 room, and put her hands upon his shoulders. 

 "Dear, are you going to be cross?" 

 

 His face softened. "Never to you, if I 

 know it, but why should strange women invade 

 the peace of a man s home? Why should a 

 woman who writes like that come here?" 

 

 "Don t blame her for her handwriting she 

 can t help it." 

 

 "I don t blame her; far from it. On the


 

 

 contrary, I take off my hat to her. A woman 

 who can take a plain pen, and plain ink, and 

 do such dazzling wonders on plain paper, is 

 entitled to sincere respect, if not admiration." 

 

 Smiling, Madame went to her desk, and in 

 a quaint, old-fashioned script, wrote a note to 

 Mrs. Lee. "There," she said, as she sealed it. 

 "I ve asked her to come to-morrow on the six 

 o clock train. I ve told her that you will meet 

 her at the station, and that we won t have 

 dinner until half-past seven. That will give 

 her time to rest and dress. If you 11 take it 

 to the post-office now, she 11 get it in the 

 morning." 

 

 Alden shrugged his shoulders good-humour- 

 edly, kissed his mother, and went out. He 

 wondered how he would recognise the "strange 

 woman" when she arrived on the morrow, 

 though few people came on the six o clock 

 train, or, for that matter, on any train. 

 

 "Might write her a little note on my own 

 account," he mused. "Ask her to take off 

 her right shoe and hold it in her left hand, or 

 something of that sort. No, that is n t neces 

 sary. I 11 bet I could go into a crowd of a 

 thousand women and pick out the one who 

 wrote that letter." 

 

 The scent of violet still haunted him, but, 

 by the time he had posted his mother s note, 

 he had forgotten all about it and was thinking 

 of Rosemary.


 

 

 planning Madame, however, was busy with plans for 

 

 for tbe . , . ,,ii 

 

 (5 Uegt her guest s comfort. She took down her best 

 hand-embroidered linen sheets, shaking out 

 the lavender that was laid between the folds, 

 selected her finest towels and dresser-covers, 

 ransacked three or four trunks in the attic for 

 an old picture of Louise Lane, found a frame 

 to fit it, laid out fresh curtains, had the 

 shining silver candlesticks cleaned again, 

 and opened wide every window of the long- 

 unused guest-room to give it a night s 

 airing. 

 

 Downstairs, she searched through the pre 

 serve-closet for dainties to tempt an unhappy 

 woman s appetite, meanwhile rejoicing with 

 housewifely pride in her well-stocked shelves. 

 That evening, while Alden read the paper, she 

 planned a feast for the next night, and mended, 

 with fairy-like stitches, the fichu of real lace 

 that she usually wore with her lavender silk 

 gown. 

 

 "Is it a party?" queried Alden, without 

 looking up from his paper. 

 

 " Yes. Is n t company a party?" 

 

 "That depends. You know three are said 

 to be a crowd." 

 

 "Still inhospitable, dear?" 

 

 "Only mildly so. I contemplate the ap 

 proaching evil with resignation, if not content." 

 

 "You and I have lived alone so long that 

 we ve got ourselves into a rut. Everyone


 

 

 97 

 

 we meet may give us something, and receive 

 something from us in return." 

 

 " I perceive," said Alden, irrelevantly, "that 

 the Lady Mother is going to be dressed in her 

 best when the guest arrives." 

 

 A pale pink flush mantled the old lady s fair 

 cheeks. At the moment she looked like a 

 faded rose that had somehow preserved its 

 sweetness. 

 

 "Why not?" she asked. 

 

 "Why do we always do for strangers what 

 we do not willingly do for our own flesh and 

 blood?" he queried, philosophically. "You 

 love me better than anything else in the world, 

 yet you would n t put on that lavender gown 

 twice a year, just for me alone. The strange 

 woman may feast her eyes upon it the moment 

 she enters the house. She 11 eat from the best 

 china, sleep between embroidered sheets, and, 

 I have no doubt, drink the wine that Father 

 put away the day I was born, to be opened at 

 my wedding." 

 

 "Not at your wedding, my son, but the day 

 you found the woman you loved." Then, 

 after a long pause, she added, shyly: 

 "Should n t it be opened now?" 

 

 "It ll keep," the young man grunted. 

 "After lying for thirty years among the cob 

 webs, a few more weeks or months or years, as 

 the case may be, won t hurt it. Besides, I 

 don t expect to have any wedding. I m 

 

 Xest 

 

 Cbingsfoc 

 Strangers


 

 9 8 

 

 

 merely going to be married. Might as well let 

 the strange woman have it." 

 

 Alden s father had, as he said, put away on 

 the day he was born all the wine that was then 

 ready to be bottled. The baby girl had been 

 welcomed gladly, especially as she had her 

 mother s eyes, but the day the second Alden 

 Marsh was born, the young father s joy had 

 known no bounds. He had gone, at dusk, to 

 the pale little mother, and, holding her in his 

 arms, had told her about the wine. 

 

 "I ve put it all away," he had said, "for 

 the boy. He s to open it the day he finds the 

 woman he loves as I love you." 

 

 The shelf in the storeroom, where he had 

 placed it, had never been disturbed, though 

 dust and cobwebs lay thickly upon it and 

 Madame had always prided herself upon her 

 immaculate housekeeping. It grieved her 

 inexpressibly because Alden cared so little 

 about it, and had for it, apparently, no senti 

 ment at all. To her it was sacred, like some 

 rare wine laid aside for communion, but, as she 

 reflected, the boy s father had died before he 

 was much more than a child. 

 

 "Don t you remember your father at all?" 

 asked Madame, with a sigh. 

 

 "I can t say that I do that is, not before 

 he died." The casket and the gloom of mourn 

 ing had made its own vivid impression upon 

 the child s sensitive mind. One moment stood


 

 

 99 

 

 out quite clearly, but he forebore to say so. 

 It was when his mother, with the tears raining 

 down her face, had lifted him in her arms and 

 bade him look at the man who lay in the casket, 

 oh, so cold and still. 

 

 "Say good-bye to Father, dear," she had 

 sobbed. "Is Father gone away?" he had 

 asked, in childish terror, then she had strained 

 him to her heart, crying out: "Just for a little 

 while! Oh, if I could only believe it was for 

 just a little while!" 

 

 The rest had faded into a mist of sadness 

 that, for a long time, had not even begun to 

 lift. When he found his mother in tears, as 

 he often did after that, he went away quietly, 

 knowing that she longed for "Father," who 

 had gone away and never returned. Later, 

 he used to sit on the top step of the big Colonial 

 porch a fragile little figure waiting, through 

 the long Summer afternoons, for the father 

 who did not come. 

 

 Once, when his mother was so absorbed in 

 her grief that she did not hear him come into 

 the room, he had laid a timid, trembling hand 

 upon her knee, saying: "Mother, if you will 

 tell me where Father is, I will go and bring him 

 back." But, instead of accepting the offer, 

 she had caught him to her breast, sobbing, with 

 a sudden rush of impassioned prayer: "Dear 

 God, no not that!" 

 

 Time, as always, had done his merciful heal- 

 

 TZbc 

 ssing of 

 tbe ffatbec


 

 IOO 

 

 

 ing, which, though slow, is divinely sure. 

 Madame was smiling, now, at some old memory 

 that had come mysteriously out of the shadow, 

 leaving all bitterness behind. She had fin 

 ished mending the lace and had laid it aside. 

 Alden took it up, awkwardly, and looked at it. 

 

 "This for the strange woman," he said, 

 teasingly, and plain black or grey silk for me, 

 though I am fain to believe that you love me 

 best. Why is it?" 

 

 "Because," she responded, playfully, "you 

 know me and love me, even without fuss and 

 frills. For those who do not know us, we 

 must put our best foot forward, in order to 

 make sure of the attention our real merit 

 deserves." 

 

 "But doesn t immediately command is 

 that it?" 

 

 " I suppose so." 

 

 "What must I wear to the train my dress 

 suit?" 

 

 "Don t be foolish, son. You 11 have plenty 

 of time to dress after you get home." 

 

 "Shall I drive, or walk?" 

 

 "Take the carriage. She 11 be tired. Un 

 happy women are always tired." 

 

 "Are they tired because they re unhappy, 

 or unhappy because they re tired? And do 

 they get unhappier when they get more tired, 

 or do they get more tired when they get 

 unhappier?"


 

 

 "Don t ask me any more conundrums to 

 night. I m going to bed, to get my beauty 

 sleep." 

 

 " You must have had a great many, judging 

 by the results." 

 

 Madame smiled as she bent to kiss his rough 

 cheek. "Good-night, my dear. Think of some 

 other pleasant things and say them to-morrow 

 night to Mrs. Lee." 

 

 " I 11 be blest if I will," Alden muttered to 

 himself, as his mother lighted a candle and 

 waved her hand prettily in farewell. " If all 

 the distressed daughters of all mother s old 

 schoolmates are coming here, to cry on her 

 shoulder and flood the whole place with salt 

 water, it s time for me to put up a little tent 

 somewhere and move into it." 

 

 By the next day, however, he had forgotten 

 his ill-humour and was at the station fully ten 

 minutes before six o clock. As it happened, 

 only one woman was among the passengers who 

 left the train at that point. 

 

 "Mrs. Lee?" he asked, taking her suit-case 

 from her. 

 

 "Yes. Mr. Marsh?" 

 

 " Yes. This way, please." 

 

 "How did you know me ? "she inquired, as she 

 took her place in the worn coupe that had been 

 in the Marsh stables for almost twenty years. 

 

 "By your handwriting," he laughed, closing 

 the door.


 

 102 

 

 faster of tbe lt)fne^art&amp;gt; 

 

 TOltb Sag 

 

 an& 

 baggage 

 

 A smile hovered for a moment around the 

 corners of her mouth, then disappeared. 

 

 "Then, too," he went on, "as you were the 

 only woman who got off the train, and we 

 were expecting you, I took the liberty of speak 

 ing to you." 

 

 "Did you ask the man to have my trunk 

 sent up?" 

 

 "Trunk ! " echoed Alden, helplessly. " Why, 

 no! Was there a trunk?" 

 

 She laughed a little, low rippling laugh 

 that had in it an undertone of sadness. 