There 

 was a peculiar, throaty quality in her voice, 

 like a muted violin or cello. "Don t be so 

 frightened, please, for I m not going to stay 

 long, really. I m merely the sort of woman 

 who can t stay over night anywhere without a 

 lot of baggage." 

 

 " It it was n t that," he murmured. 

 

 " Yes, it was. You don t need to tell me 

 polite fibs, you know. How far are we from 

 the house?" 

 

 "Not as far," returned Alden, rallying all 

 his forces for one supreme effort of gallantry, 

 "as I wish we were." 

 

 She laughed again, began to speak, then 

 relapsed into silence. Furtively, in the gath 

 ering shadow, he studied her face. She was 

 pale and cold, the delicate lines of her profile 

 conveyed a certain aloofness of spirit, and her 

 mouth drooped at the corners. Her hat and


 

 H OLetter ant&amp;gt; a Ouest 

 

 veil covered her hair, but she had brown eyes 

 with long lashes. Very long lashes, Alden 

 noted, having looked at them a second time to 

 make sure. 

 

 The silence became awkward, but he could 

 think of nothing to say. She had turned her 

 face away from him and was looking out of the 

 window. "How lovely the country is," she 

 said, pensively. "I wish sometimes I never 

 had to step on a pavement again." 

 

 "Do you have to?" he asked. 

 

 " Yes, for I m over-civilised. Like the god 

 in Greek mythology, I need the touch of earth 

 occasionally to renew my strength, but a very 

 brief contact is all-sufficient. I m a child of 

 the city, brought up on smoke and noise." 

 

 "You don t look it," he said, chiefly because 

 he could think of nothing else to say. 

 

 Madame herself opened the door for them, 

 with the old-fashioned hospitality which has 

 an indefinable charm of its own. "How do 

 you do, my dear," she said, taking the hand the 

 younger woman offered her. In the instant of 

 feminine appraisement, she had noted the 

 perfectly tailored black gown, the immaculate 

 shirt-waist and linen collar, and the discerning 

 taste that forbade plumes. The fresh, cool 

 odour of violets persisted all the way upstairs, 

 as Madame chattered along sociably, eager to 

 put the guest at her ease. 

 

 Below, they heard Alden giving orders about


 

 /toaster of tbe IDfneparo 

 

 Resting the trunk, and Mrs. Lee smiled a little, wan 

 ghost of a smile that Madame misunderstood. 

 

 "You don t need to dress, if you re tired," 

 she suggested, kindly, "though we always do. 

 Come down just as you are." 

 

 Mrs. Lee turned to the dainty little woman 

 who stood before her, arrayed in shining 

 lavender silk. The real-lace fichu was fastened 

 at the waist with an amethyst pin and at her 

 throat she wore a string of silver beads. Her 

 white hair was beautifully dressed, and some 

 where, among the smooth coils and fluffy soft 

 ness, one caught the gleam of a filigree silver 

 comb. 

 

 "Not dress?" she said. "Indeed I shall, as 

 soon as my trunk comes. That is," she added, 

 hastily, "if there s anyone to hook me up." 

 

 "There is," Madame assured her. " I 11 

 leave you now to rest. We dine at half-past 

 seven." 

 

 The sweetness of the lavender-scented room 

 brought balm to Edith Lee s tired soul. 

 "How lovely she is," she said to herself, as she 

 noted the many thoughtful provisions for her 

 comfort, "and how good it is to be here." 

 

 A silver-framed photograph stood on her 

 dressing-table, and she picked it up, wondering 

 who it might be. The hair and gown were 

 old-fashioned, and the face seemed old- 

 fashioned also, but, in a moment, she had 

 recognised her mother.


 

 H OLetter anb a Guest 

 

 Tenderness for the dead and the living filled 

 her heart. How dear it was of Madame to 

 have placed it there this little young mother, 

 just budding into womanhood! It had been 

 taken long before she had known of Edith, or 

 had more than dreamed of love. 

 

 The arrival of the trunk compelled her to 

 brush away a few foolish tears. She did not 

 stop to unpack, but only took out the dinner 

 gown that lay on top. 

 

 Promptly at half-past seven, she went 

 down into the living-room, where Alden and 

 his mother were waiting to receive her. Ma 

 dame smiled with pure delight at the vision that 

 greeted her, but the young man forgot his 

 manners and stared stared like the veriest 

 schoolboy at the tall, stately figure, clad in 

 shimmering pale green satin that rippled about 

 her feet as she walked, brought out a bit of 

 colour in her cheeks and lips, deepened the 

 brown of her eyes, and, like the stalk and 

 leaves of a tiger-lily, faded into utter insig 

 nificance before the burnished masses of her 

 red-gold hair.


 

 io6 

 

 VIII 

 

 "Mbom (Bob ibatb Jotnefc" 

 

 BREAKFAST had been cleared away and 

 Alden, with evident regret, had gone to 

 school. Madame gave her orders for the day, 

 attended to a bit of dusting which she would 

 trust no one else to do, gathered up the weekly 

 mending and came into the living-room, where 

 the guest sat, idly, robed in a gorgeous negligee 

 of sea-green crepe which was fully as becoming 

 as her dinner-gown had been the night before. 

 

 Madame had observed that Mrs. Lee was one 

 of the rarely fortunate women who look as well 

 in the morning as in the evening. Last night, 

 in the glow of the pink-shaded candles, she 

 had been beautiful, and this morning she was 

 no less lovely, though she sat in direct sun 

 light that made a halo of her hair. 

 

 The thick, creamy skin, a direct legacy from 

 Louise Lane, needed neither powder nor rouge, 

 and the scarlet lips asked for no touch of car 

 mine. But the big brown eyes were wistful 

 beyond words, the dark hollows beneath spoke 

 of sleepless nights, and the corners of the sweet


 

 t)atb 

 

 mouth drooped continually, in spite of valiant 

 efforts to smile. 

 

 "I think I should have known you any 

 where," Madame beg#n. "You look so much 

 like your mother." 

 

 "Thank you. It was dear of you to put her 

 picture on my dressing-table. It seemed like 

 a welcome from her." 

 

 Madame asked a few questions about her 

 old schoolmate, receiving monosyllabic an 

 swers, then waited. The silence was not 

 awkward, but of that intimate sort which, with 

 women, precedes confidences. 

 

 " I suppose you wonder why I came," the 

 younger woman said, after a long pause. 

 

 "No," Madame replied, gently, "for you 

 told me in your note that you were troubled 

 and thought I could help you." 

 

 " I don t know why I should have thought of 

 you especially, though I have never forgotten 

 what mother told me about coming to you, if 

 I were in trouble, but two or three days ago, 

 it came to me all at once that I was wandering 

 in a maze of darkness and that you could show 

 me the way out." 

 

 "I hope I may," the old lady murmured. 

 " I shall be very glad to, if I can. What has 

 gone wrong?" 

 

 "Everything," she returned, her brown 

 eyes filling with mist. "Of course it s my 

 husband. It always is, is n t it?"


 

 io8 

 

 flDaster ot tbe IDfnegarfc 

 

 Running 

 Bwav 

 

 "I don t know why it should be. Is he 

 cruel to you?" 

 

 "No, that is, he doesn t beat me or any 

 thing of that sort. He is n t coarse. But 

 there s a refined sort of cruelty that hurts 

 worse. I I could n t bear it any longer, and 

 so I came away." 

 

 "Was he willing for you to come?" 

 

 " I did n t ask him. I just came." 

 

 Madame s glasses dropped from her aristo 

 cratic nose in astonishment. "Why, my dear 

 Mrs. Lee! How could you!" 

 

 "Edith, please, if you will," she answered, 

 wiping her eyes. Then she laughed bitterly. 

 "Don t be kind to me, for I m not used to it 

 and it weakens my armour of self-defence. 

 Tell me I m horrid and have done with it." 

 

 "Poor child," breathed Madame. "Poor, 

 dear child!" 

 

 For a few moments the young woman bit 

 her lips, keeping back the tears by evident 

 effort. Then, having gained her self-control, 

 she went on. 

 

 " I m twenty-eight, now," she said. " I 

 remember mother used to say she always had 

 her suspicions of a woman who was willing to 

 tell the truth about her age." 

 

 "Sounds just like her," commented Madame, 

 taking up a dainty lavender silk stocking that 

 had "run down" from the hem. 

 

 " I ve been married six years, but it seems


 

 1batb 

 

 like twenty. Almost from the first, there has 

 been friction between us, but nobody knows it, 

 except you unless he s told his friends, and I 

 don t think he d do that. We ve both had a 

 preference for doing the family laundry work 

 on the premises." 

 

 "What?" queried Madame, missing the 

 allusion. 

 

 "Not washing our soiled linen in public," 

 Edith explained. "While I live with my 

 husband as his wife, we stand together before 

 the world as far as it is in my power to manage 

 it. I do not intentionally criticise him to 

 anyone, nor permit anyone to criticise him. I 

 endeavour to look ahead, protect him against 

 his own weakness or folly, and, as far as a 

 woman s tact and thought may do, shield him 

 from the consequences of his own mistakes. I 

 lie for him whenever necessary or even advis 

 able. I have tried to be, for six years, shelter, 

 strength, comfort, courage. And," she con 

 cluded bitterly, "I ve failed." 

 

 "How so?" 

 

 "We live in the same house, but alien and 

 apart. We talk at the table as two strangers 

 might in a crowded restaurant or hotel, that is, 

 when he s there. I dare not ask people to 

 dinner, for I never know whether he s coming 

 or not. He might promise faithfully to come, 

 and then appear at midnight, without apology 

 or excuse."


 

 no 

 

 flDaster ot tbe 

 

 mil Sorts 

 

 of Subtero 

 

 fugcg 

 

 "He supports you," suggested Madame, 

 glancing at the sea-green crepe. 

 

 "Yes, of course. That is, the question of 

 money has n t arisen between us, one way or 

 another. I have no children, father and 

 mother left me plenty of money, and I don t 

 mind using it in any way that seems advisable. 

 In fact, if I had to, I d rather pay the house 

 hold bills than beg for money, as many a 

 wife is compelled to do or, for that matter, 

 even ask for it. It is n t as if I had to earn 

 it myself, you know. If I had to, I d probably 

 feel differently about it, but, as it is, money 

 does n t matter between us at all. 

 

 "Friends of mine," she resumed, "have to 

 resort to all sorts of subterfuges. I know 

 women who bribe the tradespeople to make 

 their bills larger than they should be and give 

 them the difference in cash. I know men 

 who seem to think they do their wives a 

 favour by paying for the food they themselves 

 eat, and by paying their own laundry bills. 

 Then, every once in a while, I see in some 

 magazine an article written by a man who 

 wonders why women prefer to work in shops 

 and factories, rather than to marry. It must 

 be "better to get a pay-envelope every Saturday 

 night without question or comment, than it is 

 to humiliate your immortal soul to the dust it 

 arose from, begging a man for money to pay 

 for the dinner he ate last night, or for the price


 

 Mborn 6ot&amp;gt; tmtb 

 

 of a new veil to cover up your last year s 

 hat." 

 

 "All this," said Madame, threading her 

 needle again, "is new to me. I live so out of 

 the world, that I know very little of what is 

 going on outside." 

 

 "Happy woman! Perhaps I should be 

 happy, also, since this particular phase of the 

 problem does n t concern me. Money may not 

 be your best friend, but it s the quickest to 

 act, and seems to be favourably recognised in 

 more places than most friends are. For the 

 size of it, a check book is about the greatest 

 convenience I know of." 

 

 The brown eyes were cold now, and their 

 soft lights had become a glitter. The scarlet 

 mouth was no longer sweet and womanly, but 

 set into a hard, tight line. Colour burned in 

 her cheeks not a delicate flush, but the 

 crimson of defiance, of daring. She was, as 

 she sat there, a living challenge to Fate. 

 

 "Is he happy?" queried Madame. 

 

 " I suppose so. His ideal of a wife seems to 

 be one who shall arrange and order his house, 

 look after his clothing, provide for his material 

 comfort, be there when he comes, sit at the 

 head of his table, dressed in her best, when he 

 deigns to honour dinner with his presence, ask 

 no questions as to his comings or goings, keep 

 still if he prefers to read either the morning or 

 evening paper while he eats, and to refrain


 

 112 

 

 flDaster of tbe liMneparo 

 

 Quiet 

 Rcbuhe 

 

 from annoying him by being ill, or, at least, 

 by speaking of illness. 

 

 "I saw, once, a huge cocoa-husk door-mat, 

 with the word Welcome on it in big red 

 letters. I ve been sorry ever since that I 

 did n t buy it, for it typified me so precisely. 

 It would be nice, would n t it, to have at your 

 front door something that exactly indicated 

 the person inside, like the overture to a Wagner 

 opera, using all the themes and motifs that 

 were coming? That s what I ve been for six 

 years, but, if a worm will turn, why not a 

 wife?" 

 

 " If you 11 excuse me for saying so," Madame 

 answered, in a tone of quiet rebuke, "I don t 

 think it was quite right to come away without 

 letting him know you were coming." 

 

 "Why not?" 

 

 "He 11 wonder where you are." 

 

 " I ve had plenty of opportunity to wonder 

 where he was." 

 

 "But what will he think, when he finds out 

 you have gone?" 

 

 " He may not have noticed it. I have com 

 petent servants and they 11 look after him as 

 well or better than I do. If I had left a wax 

 figure in the library, in one of my gowns, with 

 its back to the door and its head bent over a 

 book, I could have been well on my way to 

 China before I was missed, or, rather, that I 

 was among those not present. If he has found


 

 "Wbom (Bob Ifoatb 3ofne&" 

 

 it out, it has been by the application of the same 

 inductive methods by which I discover that 

 he s not coming home to dinner." 

 

 "Do you love him?" In the answer to that 

 question lay Madame s solution of all difficul 

 ties, past and to come. To her, it was the 

 divine reagent of all Life s complicated chem 

 istry; the swift turning of the prism, with 

 ragged edges breaking the light into the col 

 ours of the spectrum, to a point where refrac 

 tion was impossible. 

 

 "I did," Edith sighed, "but marriage is a 

 great strain upon love." 

 

 The silvery cadence of Madame s laughter 

 rang through the house and echoed along the 

 corridor. As though in answer, the clock 

 struck ten, the canary sang happily, and a 

 rival melody came from the kitchen, in cracked 

 soprano, mercifully muted by distance and two 

 closed doors. 

 

 "See what you ve started," Edith said. 

 " It s like the poem, where the magic kiss woke 

 the princess, and set all the clocks to going 

 and the little dogs to barking outside. Don t 

 let me talk you to death I ve been chattering 

 for considerably over an hour, and, very sel 

 fishly, of my own affairs, to the exclusion of 

 everything else." 

 

 "But your affairs interest me extremely. I 

 wish I knew of some way to help you." 

 

 "In the last analysis, of course, it comes to


 

 IJ 4 /iDaster of tbe 

 

 this either go on and make the best of it, or 

 

 {Carriage quit." 

 

 "Not not divorce," breathed Madame. 

 Her violet eyes were wide with horror. 

 

 "No," Edith answered, shortly, "not 

 divorce. Separation, possibly, but not divorce, 

 which is only a legal form permitting one to 

 marry again. Personally, I feel bound by the 

 solemn oath I took at the altar, until death 

 do us part, and forsaking all others keep thee 

 only unto me so long as we both shall live. 

 All the laws in the country could n t make me 

 feel right with my own conscience if I violated 

 that oath." 

 

 "If the marriage service were changed," 

 Madame said, nodding her approval, "it 

 might be justified. If one said, at the altar, 

 Until death or divorce do us part, or Until I 

 see someone else I like better/ there d be 

 reason for it, but, as it is, there is n t. And 

 again, it says, Those whom God hath joined let 

 no man put asunder." 

 

 "Those whom God hath joined no man can 

 put asunder," Edith retorted, "but did God 

 do it? It doesn t seem right to blame Him 

 for all the pitiful mistakes that masquerade as 

 marriage. Mother used to say," she resumed, 

 after a little, "that when you re more miser 

 able without a man than you think you ever 

 could be with him, it s time to marry him, and 

 when you re more miserable with him than


 

 H5 

 

 you think you ever could be without him. it s 

 . . , TOlomen 

 

 time to quit. 

 

 "And," suggested Madame, "in which class 

 do you belong?" 

 

 "Both, I think that is, I m miserable 

 enough to belong to both. I m unhappy 

 when he s with me and wretched when he 

 is n t. As he mostly is n t, I m more wretched 

 than unhappy. In the small circle in which 

 I move, I m considered a very fortunate 

 woman. 

 

 "Women who are compelled to be mendi 

 cants and who do not know that I have a 

 private income, envy me my gowns and hats, 

 my ability to ask a friend or two to luncheon 

 if I choose, and the unfailing comfort of a taxi- 

 cab if 1 m caught in the rain. They think, if 

 they had my gowns and my grooming, that 

 they could win and keep love, which seems to 

 be about all a woman wants. But these 

 things are, in reality, as useless as painting the 

 house when the thermometer is below zero and 

 you need a fire inside to warm your hands by. 

 I have imported gowns and real lace and furs 

 and jewels and all the grooming I m willing 

 to take, but my soul is frozen and starved. 

 

 "My house," she went on, "is n t a mansion, 

 but it has all the comforts anyone could 

 reasonably require. As far as my taste can 

 discover, it s artistic and even unusual. The 

 dinner my cook sends up every night is as


 

 n6 toaster of tbe 

 

 good, or better than any first-class hotel can 

 

 "Cbing . . . J . . 

 

 lacwng serve, though it may not be quite so elaborate. 

 

 "I myself am not so bad to look at, I am 

 well dressed, and never untidy. I am disgust 

 ingly well, which is fortunate, for most men 

 hate a sick woman. If I have a headache I 

 don t speak of it. I neither nag nor fret nor 

 scold, and I even have a few parlour tricks 

 which other people consider attractive. For 

 six years, I have given generously and from a 

 full heart everything he has seemed to require 

 of me. 

 

 " I ve striven in every way to please him, 

 adapting myself to his tastes. I ve even been 

 the sort of woman men call a good fellow, 

 admiringly among women and contemptu 

 ously among themselves. And, in return, I 

 have nothing not even the fairy gold that 

 changes to withered leaves when you take it 

 into the sunshine." 

 

 "You seem to have a good deal, dear- 

 youth and health and strength and sufficient 

 income. How many women would be glad 

 to have what you have?" 

 

 " I want love," cried Edith, piteously. " I 

 want someone to care for me to be proud of 

 me for what I am and the little things I can 

 do! If I painted a hideous dog on a helpless 

 china plate, I d want someone to think it was 

 pretty. If I cooked a mess in the chafing-dish 

 or on the stove, I d want someone to think it


 

 TKflbom Oo& 1batb Joined" 

 

 was good, just because I did it! If I embroid 

 ered a red rose on a pink satin sofa cushion, or 

 painted a Winter scene on a wooden snow- 

 shovel and hung it up in the parlour, I d 

 want someone to think it was beautiful. If I 

 wrote a limerick, I d want someone to think 

 it was clever. I want appreciation, considera 

 tion, sympathy, affection! I m starving for 

 love, I m dying for it, and I d go across the 

 desert on my knees for the man who could give 

 it to me!" 

 

 "Perhaps he cares," said Madame, consol 

 ingly, "and does n t show it." 

 

 "You can tell by the way a man kisses you 

 whether he cares or not. If he does n t kiss 

 you at all, he does n t care and does n t even 

 mind your knowing it. If he kisses you duti 

 fully, without a trace of feeling, and, by pre 

 ference, on your cheek or neck, he does n t care 

 but thinks he ought to, and hopes you won t 

 find out that he does n t. But, if he cares 

 ah, how it thrills you if he cares!" 

 

 Madame s violet eyes grew dim. " I know," 

 she said, brokenly, "for I had it all once, long 

 ago. People used to say that marriage changes 

 love, but, with us, it only grew and strength 

 ened. The beginning was no more the ful 

 ness of love than an acorn is the oak tree 

 which springs from it. We had our trials, our 

 differences, and our various difficulties, but 

 they meant nothing.


 

 us flDaster of tbe 

 

 at flfta^ " I ve had almost all the experiences of 

 life," she continued, clearing her throat. 

 "The endless cycle of birth and death has 

 passed on its way through me. I ve known 

 poverty, defeat, humiliation, doubt, grief, 

 discouragement, despair. I ve had illness and 

 death; I ve borne children only to lose them 

 again. I ve worked hard and many times 

 1 ve had to work alone, but I ve had love, 

 though all I have left of it is a sunken grave." 

 

 "And I," answered Edith, "have had 

 everything else but love. Believe me, I d 

 take all you ve had, even the grave, if I could 

 have it once." 

 

 "It may come," said Madame, hopefully. 

 

 Edith shook her head. "That s what I m 

 afraid of." 

 

 "How so? Why be afraid?" 

 

 "You see," she explained, "I m young yet 

 and I m not so desperately unattractive as 

 my matrimonial experiences might lead one 

 to believe. I have n t known there was 

 another man on earth except my husband, 

 but his persistent neglect has made me open 

 my eyes a little, and I begin to see others, on 

 a far horizon. Red blood has a way of 

 answering to red blood, whether there are 

 barriers between or not, and if I loved another 

 man, and he were unscrupulous - " 

 

 "But," objected the older woman, "you 

 could n t love an unscrupulous man."


 

 "Mbom &amp;lt;Bot&amp;gt; toatb 3oinet&amp;gt;" 

 

 "Couldn t I? My dear, when I see the 

 pitiful specimens of manhood that women 

 love, the things they give, the sacrifices they 

 make, the neglect and desertions they suffer 

 from, the countless humiliations they strive to 

 bear proudly, I wonder that any one of us 

 dares to look in the mirror. 

 

 "It s the eternal woman-hunger for love 

 that makes us what we are, compels us to 

 endure what we do, and keeps us all door-mats 

 with Welcome printed on us in red letters. 

 Eagerly trustful, we keep on buying tickets 

 to the circus, and never discover until we re 

 old and grey, that it s always exactly the 

 same entertainment, and we re admitted to 

 it, each time, by a different door. 

 

 "Sometimes we see the caged wild animals 

 first, and again, we arrive at the pink-lemon 

 ade stand; or, up at the other end, where 

 the trapezes are, or in the middle, opposite 

 the tank. Sometimes the band plays and 

 sometimes it does n t, but all you need in 

 order to be thoroughly disillusioned is to stay 

 to the concert, which bears about the same 

 relation to the circus that marriage does to 

 your anticipations." 

 

 "Are you afraid," laughed Madame, "that 

 you II buy another ticket?" 

 

 "No, but I II find it, or somebody will give 

 me a pass. I m too young to stay to the 

 concert and there s more of life coming to me


 

 I2O 

 

 /IDaster ot tbe 

 

 still. I only hope and pray that I 11 manage 

 to keep my head and not make the fatal, heart 

 breaking mistake of the women who go over 

 the precipice, waving defiance at the social 

 law that bids them stay with the herd." 

 

 "Your metaphors are mixed," Madame 

 commented. "Concerts and circuses, and 

 herds, and precipices and door-mats. I feel 

 as though you had presented me with a jig-saw 

 puzzle." 

 

 "So I have. Is my life anything more than 

 that? I don t even know that all the pieces 

 are there. If they would only print the 

 picture on the cover of the box, or tell us how 

 many pieces there are, and give us more than 

 one or two at a time, and eternity to solve it in, 

 we d stand some chance, perhaps." 

 

 "More mixed metaphors," Madame said, 

 rolling up the mended stockings. 

 

 A maid came into the dining-room and 

 began to set the table for luncheon. Edith 

 rose from her chair and came to Madame. 

 The dark hollows under her eyes were evident 

 now and all the youth was gone from her face 

 and figure. 

 

 "Well," she said, in a low tone, "what am I 

 to do?" 

 

 It was some little time before Madame 

 answered. "I do not know. These modern 

 times are too confused for me. The old way 

 would have been to wait, to do the best one


 

 H dbom eofc 1batb 3ofnefc" 

 

 could, and trust God to make it right in His 

 own good time." 

 

 Edith shook her head. "I ve waited and 

 I ve done the best I could, and I ve tried to 

 trust." 

 

 "No one can solve a problem for another, 

 but, I think, when it s time to act, one knows 

 what to do and the way is clearly opened for 

 one to do it. Don t you feel better for having 

 come here and talked to me?" 

 

 "Yes, indeed," said the young woman, 

 gratefully. "So much was right I m sure 

 of that. The train had scarcely started before 

 I felt more at peace than I had for years." 

 

 "Then, dear, won t you stay with me until 

 you know just what to do?" 

 

 Edith looked long and earnestly into the 

 sweet old face. "Do you mean it? It may 

 be a long time." 

 

 " I mean it no matter how long it is." 

 

 Quick tears sprang to the brown eyes, and 

 Edith brushed them aside, half ashamed. "It 

 means more trunks," she said, "and your 

 son " 

 

 "Will be delighted to have you with us," 

 Madame concluded. 

 

 "Are you sure?" 

 

 "Absolutely." Madame was not at all sure, 

 but she told her lie prettily. 

 

 "Then," said Edith, with a smile, " I 11 

 stay."


 

 122 

 

 Bl&en s 

 

 fl&ea of a 

 

 Urunft 

 

 IX 

 

 Spring 

 

 WITH the tact that seems the birthright of 

 the gifted few, Mrs. Lee adjusted her 

 self to the ways of the Marsh household. 

 Some commotion had been caused by the 

 arrival of four more trunks, of different shapes 

 and sizes, but after they had been unpacked 

 and stored, things went on smoothly. 

 

 Alden s idea of a trunk had hitherto been 

 very simple. To him, it was only a substan 

 tial box, variation in size and in exterior finish 

 being the only possible diversions from the 

 original type. When it fell to his lot, on a 

 Saturday morning, to superintend the removal 

 of Mrs. Lee s empty trunks to the attic, he 

 discovered the existence of hat trunks, dresser 

 trunks, and wardrobe trunks, cannily con 

 structed with huge warts on all sides but the 

 one the trunk was meant to stand upon. 

 

 "Why so scornful?" a sweet voice asked, at 

 his elbow. 

 

 "I m not scornful," he returned. "I m 

 merely interested."


 

 

 "You re fortunate," she smiled, "to be so 

 easily interested." 

 

 "We re out of the world here, you know, 

 and unfamiliar varieties of the trunk species 

 make me feel much as Crusoe did when he came 

 upon a human footprint in the sand." 

 

 " I wonder," mused Mrs. Lee, "how he really 

 did feel. It must have been dramatic beyond 

 all words." 

 

 She sat down on the window-seat in the hall 

 and leaned back against the casement of the 

 open window. The warm Spring wind, laden 

 with the sweet scent of growing things, played 

 caressingly about her neck and carried to Alden 

 a subtle fragrance of another sort. Her tur 

 quoise-blue silk kimono, delicately embroidered 

 in gold, was open at the throat and fastened at 

 the waist with a heavy golden cord. Below, it 

 opened over a white petticoat that was a mass 

 of filmy lace ruffles. Her tiny feet peeped out 

 beneath the lace, clad in pale blue silk stock 

 ings and fascinating Chinese slippers that 

 turned up at the toes. 

 

 From above came discordant rumblings 

 and eloquent, but smothered remarks on the 

 general subject of trunks. Mrs. Lee laughed. 

 "They re trying to make the wardrobe-trunk 

 stand up on the wrong end, and it won t." 

 

 "How do you know that s it?" 

 

 "Because I ve heard the same noises and the 

 same general trend of conversation all the


 

 124 

 

 flDaster of tbe 

 

 Sounds 

 from tbe 

 

 Bttic 

 

 way from the Atlantic to the Pacific and back 

 again. The farther west you go, the more 

 accomplished the men are in the art of pro 

 fanity." 

 

 " Is it an art? I thought it came naturally." 

 

 "It does, to some, but you have no idea 

 what study and constant practice can do in 

 developing a natural gift." 

 

 The sunlight illumined her hair into a mass 

 of spun gold that sparkled and gleamed and 

 shone. It made golden lights in her brown 

 eyes, caressed the ivory softness of her skin, 

 and deepened the scarlet of her lips. 

 

 "Listen," she said. "Is n t it awful?" 

 

 "No," returned Alden, "it isn t. In fact, 

 I don t know of any sound I d rather hear 

 than your trunks being put into our attic." 

 

 A faint suggestion of a dimple appeared 

 at the corner of her mouth, then vanished. 

 "Well done," she said. "You have atoned 

 nobly for your dismay the night I came, when 

 you found I d brought a trunk." 

 

 "I wish you wouldn t," he replied, awk 

 wardly. "It was n t that." 

 

 "Such a small trunk," she went on, merci 

 lessly. "Just a plain little steamer trunk 

 that you can put under a bed. The kind you 

 can ask a cabman to take down to the cab for 

 you. A little trunk that a woman can almost 

 carry herself! Only room for one gown, one 

 hat, and a few toilet articles!"


 

 

 The golden lights in her eyes were dancing 

 and her hair shimmered in the sun. Alden sat 

 down at the farthest end of the window-seat 

 and looked out upon the vineyard, faintly 

 green, now, with the new leaves. The two 

 men descended from the attic and went down 

 the back stairs. 

 

 "How did Robinson Crusoe feel when he 

 saw the footprint?" he asked, determined to 

 get away from the unlucky subject of trunks. 

 

 "I don t know," Edith answered, "for I 

 was n t there. He must have been surprised 

 and frightened and pleased all at once. How 

 interesting it must be to have something hap 

 pen to you that never happened to anybody 

 before!" 

 

 "But it s all happened before," he objected. 

 "Is there anything new under the sun ?" 

 

 "It s been new, at one time or another- 

 We re always too late, that s all. Somebody 

 ate the first oyster and somebody went to sleep 

 first and somebody wore the first false hair. 

 

 "No," she continued, with a rose-pink flush 

 mantling her face, "I don t. If I did, I 

 would n t mind saying so, but Nature gave me 

 quantities of it, so why should I borrow more? 

 Besides, I don t believe there is any more like 

 it, so I could n t, anyway." 

 

 "No," he returned, thoughtfully, "I don t 

 believe there is any more like it, either. Your 

 wish to be first in something is surely gratified,


 

 126 

 

 jflDaster of tbe Dine^arfc 

 

 IReb f)ait 

 

 anb 

 Huburn 

 

 for there never was such hair as yours and 

 never will be again." 

 

 "Mother s was like it." 

 

 He shook his head. "No, it wasn t. I 

 never saw your mother, but I know better 

 than that." 

 

 "Ask your mother. There she is now." 

 

 Madame appeared at the head of the stairs, 

 on the way to her room, to dress for luncheon. 

 She paused to smile at the two who sat on the 

 window-seat, then would have gone straight on 

 had not Edith called to her. 

 

 "Mrs. Marsh! Isn t my hair exactly like 

 my mother s?" 

 

 Madame came to her, turned the shining 

 head a little more toward the sun, and patted 

 the fluffiness caressingly. "No," she said, 

 "though your mother had glorious hair, it was 

 nothing like this. Hers was auburn and 

 smooth, yours is reddish-gold almost copper- 

 coloured and fluffy. Besides, you must have 

 nearly twice as much of it." 

 

 "There," said Alden, " I told you so." 

 

 "But," persisted Edith, "if it s really 

 copper-coloured, it s common. Look at the 

 lady on the copper cent, for instance." 

 

 "The lady on the copper cent," returned 

 Alden, "is a gentleman who wears feathers." 

 

 "But under his feathers he has hair the 

 colour of this." 

 

 "He may not have any hair at all."


 

 

 127 

 

 They both laughed, and Madame smiled, 

 though she did not quite understand what 

 they were talking about. She was still smiling 

 when she reached her own room, for she found 

 it very pleasant to have Edith there, and was 

 delighted to have Alden come to a realising 

 sense of his duties as host. 

 

 He had, indeed, conducted himself admira 

 bly ever since Mrs. Lee s arrival, though he 

 had been very quiet and reserved at first. 

 With some trepidation, she had told him that 

 she had invited the guest to remain indefinitely, 

 tactfully choosing a moment after an unusually 

 good dinner, when they chanced to be alone. 

 

 Alden had taken it calmly, betraying no 

 outward sign of any sort of emotion. " What s 

 the matter with her?" he had asked, curiously. 

 "What s she in trouble about?" 

 

 " If she wants you to know, my son, she will 

 tell you herself," Madame had replied, in a 

 tone of gentle rebuke. " I have no right to 

 violate her confidence." 

 

 He shrugged his shoulders good-humouredly. 

 "You don t need to squelch me like that, 

 Mother. I don t know that I care, particu 

 larly. I was merely making conversation." 

 

 "Refined conversation is not made of 

 impertinences," Madame suggested. The words 

 were harsh, but the tone was kind. 

 

 "Don t stab me with epigrams, please, for 

 I don t believe I deserve it." 

 

 liUbat a 

 

 tbe 

 

 matter 

 witb Uer 1


 

 128 

 

 /toaster of tbe Dinegaro 

 

 Breams 

 

 Cbil&rcn 

 

 Madame recalled every word they had said 

 as she took down her afternoon gown of 

 black silk, and began to sew frills of real lace 

 in the neck and sleeves. She was glad he had 

 been pleasant about it, for it seemed much 

 more like living, someway, to have another 

 woman in the house. 

 

 If Virginia had lived she, too, had brown 

 eyes, but her hair was brown also. She would 

 have been four years older than Edith was 

 now, and, undoubtedly, married. All Ma- 

 dame s feminine ancestors for generations back 

 had been married. The only spinster in the 

 family, so far as Madame knew, had remained 

 true to the memory of a dead lover. 

 

 "Some women are born to be married, some 

 achieve marriage, and others have marriage 

 thrust upon them," Madame said to herself, 

 unconsciously paraphrasing an old saying. 

 Virginia would have been meant for it, too, 

 and, by now, there would have been children 

 in the old house, pattering back and forth upon 

 the stairs, lisping words that meant no more 

 than the bubbling of a fountain, and stretching 

 up tiny hands that looked like crumpled rose- 

 petals, pleading to be taken up and loved. 

 

 These dream-children tugged strangely at 

 the old lady s heart-strings in her moments 

 of reverie. Even yet, after Rosemary came 

 but they would not be like her own flesh and 

 blood, as a daughter s children always are.


 

 a Spring 2&amp;gt;as 

 

 Poor Rosemary! How miserable she was at 

 home, and how little she would need to make 

 her happy! To think that she dared not tell 

 her Grandmother and Aunt that she was 

 engaged to Alden! Madame s cheeks grew 

 warm with resentment in the girl s behalf. 

 Motherless, friendless, alone, with Life s great 

 cup of wonder in her rough, red hands! 

 

 A tap at the door made her start. "Come 

 in!" she called. 

 

 It was Edith, trig and tailor-made, in dark 

 green, with a crisp white linen shirtwaist, 

 an immaculate collar, and a dashing green 

 tie. 

 

 "Mr. Marsh has invited me to go for a drive 

 after luncheon," she said, "and he asked me 

 to come and see if you were n t almost ready. 

 May I do your hair for you?" 

 

 Madame submitted, not because she cared 

 to have her hair done, but because she liked 

 to be "fussed over," as she put it. There was 

 something very pleasant in the touch of 

 Edith s cool, soft hands. 

 

 " You re you re not going to change the 

 way I do it, are you?" she asked, a little 

 anxiously. 

 

 "No, indeed! I wouldn t change it for 

 anything. It suits you just as it is." 

 

 " I m glad you think so, for I ve always 

 worn it like this. Alden would n t know me 

 if I became fashionable."


 

 

 it isn t "He doesn t look a bit like you," said 

 Edith, irrelevantly. 

 

 "No, but he s the living image of his father, 

 and I m very glad. It keeps me from from 

 missing him too much." Madame s voice 

 broke a little on the last words. 

 

 " It must be lovely to be missed," said Edith, 

 quickly. "Now I - " 

 

 "Dear, have n t you told him yet?" 

 

 " He s probably discovered it by this time. 

 Still, I don t know I ve only been away a 

 week." 

 

 "It isn t right," said Madame, decidedly. 

 " You must let him know where you are." 

 

 "Why? I never know where he is." 

 

 "That does n t make any difference. Two 

 wrongs never make one perfect right. If you 

 do your part, things will be only half wrong, 

 instead of entirely so." 

 

 "I ll do whatever you think best," said 

 Edith, humbly. "I came to you because 1 

 could think for myself no longer. I 11 write 

 him a note before luncheon, if you say so, and 

 post it this afternoon." 

 

 " I do say so." 

 

 Therefore luncheon waited for a few 

 moments, to Alden s secret impatience, until 

 Edith came down with her note. She offered 

 it to Madame, doubtfully. "Want to see it?" 

 

 "No, dear. I ll trust you." 

 

 She sealed it with shamefaced gladness that


 

 a 

 

 Madame had not availed herself of the oppor 

 tunity. She was quite sure that her coun 

 sellor would not approve of the few formal lines 

 which were all she had been able to make her 

 self write. 

 

 After luncheon, when Alden assisted her into 

 Madame s decrepit phaeton, and urged the 

 superannuated horse into a wildly exciting 

 pace of three miles an hour, she asked to be 

 driven to the post-office. 

 

 "Thank you," said Alden, "for alluding to 

 it as a drive. It s more like a walk." 

 

 " It is n t exactly like going out in a touring 

 car," she admitted, "but it s very pleasant, 

 nevertheless. It gives you time to look at the 

 scenery." 

 

 "Also to photograph it if you should so 

 desire. You don t even need to limit yourself 

 to snap-shots. A time-exposure is altogether 

 possible." 

 

 When they reached the post-office, Alden 

 took her note, and went through the formality 

 of tying the horse. He glanced at the super 

 scription, not because he was interested in her 

 unknown correspondent, but because the hand 

 writing claimed his attention. Through the 

 delicate angular tracery he made out the 

 address: "Mr. William G. Lee." The street 

 and number were beyond his skill in the brief 

 time he had at his command. 

 

 "So," he said, when he came back, "you re


 

 132 

 

 

 tore. 

 TOUlliam 

 

 Mrs. William G. I trust you don t call him 

 William ?" 

 

 " No he s the sort of William who is always 

 known as Billy. 

 

 "Good! That speaks well for him." 

 

 Alden began to wonder, as he alternately 

 coaxed and threatened the horse toward the 

 river-road, what manner of man she had mar 

 ried. Someone, undoubtedly, with the face 

 and figure of Apollo, the courtesy of Chester 

 field, and the character of a saint. "It was 

 good of him," he said, gratefully, "to let you 

 come to us." 

 

 Edith bit her lips and turned her face away. 

 " I was glad to come," she answered, after a 

 pause. For a moment she trembled upon the 

 verge of a confidence, then summoned all her 

 conversational powers to the rescue. 

 

 She began with the natural beauty of the 

 country through which they were driving, 

 observed that the roads were better adapted 

 to a horse than to an automobile, noted the 

 pleasant situation of the Marsh house on the 

 river shore, veered for a moment to the sub 

 ject of good roads in France, came back to the 

 blue reflection of the sky upon the smooth 

 surface of the river, admired the situation of 

 the vineyard, said that Madame s phaeton was 

 extremely comfortable, and concluded by 

 asking if it was n t almost time for apple- 

 blossoms.


 

 a Spring 

 

 "All of which means," said Alden, quietly, 

 "that you re unhappily married." 

 

 "How do you know?" demanded Edith, 

 crimson with surprise and mortification. " Did 

 did your mother tell you?" 

 

 "No, she did n t most decidedly she did n t. 

 I just know, that s all." 

 

 "How? Do I betray myself so completely 

 as that?" 

 

 He answered her question by another. 

 "How did you know, the night you came, that 

 I was surprised and not altogether pleased by 

 the fact that you had brought a trunk? Were 

 my manners as bad as all that?" 

 

 "Why, no I just knew." 

 

 "And how did you know, this morning, 

 when we were sitting on the window-seat, 

 that I was wondering whether or not you wore 

 false hair?" 

 

 "Why I just knew." 

 

 "That s it, exactly." 

 

 "How long have you known?" 

 

 "Ask me something easier than that," he 

 laughed, endeavouring to relieve a situation 

 that threatened to become awkward. Fol 

 lowing his lead, she began to ask questions 

 about the vineyard, and, when he told her he 

 feared he knew very little about his work, 

 suggested that he should read up on vine- 

 culture and make it the best-paying vineyard 

 in the State.


 

 134 

 

 

 Hn 

 Bfternoon 

 

 EJrire 

 

 "Has mother been talking to you?" he 

 demanded, turning Jo her quickly. 

 

 "About the vineyard? No. But, if it s 

 your work, why not do it better than anybody 

 else does it?" 

 

 Alden looked at her long and earnestly. 

 The golden lights of her eyes were thrown into 

 shadow now, for it was afternoon and they 

 were driving east. Her answering smile 

 gave him confidence, courage. Moreover, it 

 challenged him in some subtle way he could 

 not analyse. It dared him, as it were, to 

 make the best of the vineyard and himself. 

 

 "Thank you," he said, at length. "I 

 believe I will." 

 

 The divine moment passed, and, for the 

 remainder of the drive, they talked common 

 places. But the fresh air from the hills, the 

 freedom of the wind-swept spaces, the steady 

 aspiration of everything that lived, brought 

 the colour to Edith s cheeks, the sparkle to her 

 eyes, and ministered secretly to her soul. 

 When she went in, she looked happier than 

 she had since she came. Madame saw it and 

 was glad, but wisely said nothing. 

 

 She came down at dinner-time in a black 

 lace gown trimmed with spangles that glittered 

 when she moved. It was cut away slightly 

 from the rounded, ivory throat, and the white 

 arms were bare to the elbow. The upper parts 

 of the sleeves were made of black velvet ribbon,


 

 H Spring Bap 

 

 135 

 

 latticed into small diamond-shaped openings 

 through which the satin texture of the skin 

 showed in the candlelight. She wore no rings, 

 except the slender circlet of gold that had been 

 put on her finger at the altar, six years ago. 

 

 Conversation at dinner proceeded slowly, 

 but on pleasant lines. Edith seemed pre 

 occupied, and, at times, Alden relapsed into 

 long silences. 