Madame noted that they 

 scarcely spoke to each other, and was vaguely 

 troubled, for she liked Edith, and wanted 

 Alden to like her too. 

 

 After dinner, Edith played cribbage with 

 Madame and Alden read the paper. When 

 Madame had won three games, in rapid succes 

 sion, Edith said good-night. Alden, from the 

 depths of his paper, murmured the conven 

 tional response. 

 

 That night he started from his sleep with a 

 sense of foreboding. He sat up and listened, 

 but there was no sound. Not even the wind 

 moving a shutter, nor a swaying branch tap 

 ping at his window not a footfall, nor an 

 echo, nor a breath. 

 

 The tall clock on the landing struck four. 

 The silvery strokes died away into a silence 

 that was positive, rather than negative. The 

 sense of foreboding still persisted; moreover, 

 he was conscious that someone else was awake 

 also. 

 

 Sense 

 of 

 

 foreboMncj


 

 136 

 

 

 B 

 

 cr 

 perception 

 

 Was it his mother ? Was she ill ? No he 

 was sure of that. Was it Edith? Yes, that 

 was it. She was awake, and had been awake 

 all night. Moreover, she was crying. 

 

 His heart throbbed with tender pity. He 

 yearned to comfort her, to assure her that 

 whatever was wrong must eventually be made 

 right. Why, from the crown of her beautiful 

 head to the turned-up toe of her blue Chinese 

 slipper, Edith had been made for joy and for 

 love. 

 

 Out of the darkness came a sudden mys 

 terious perception. She knew she had awak 

 ened him, and had smiled at the knowledge. 

 A sense of weariness quickly followed, then a 

 restful silence which carried no thought with 

 it. 

 

 He lay back on his pillow and waited, with 

 his eyes closed, until he felt that she was 

 asleep. Then he slept also.


 

 X 

 

 a OLittle Brown flDouse 

 

 ROSEMARY peered into the letter box and 

 saw that The Household Guardian was 

 there. On one Thursday it had failed to 

 appear and she had been unable to convince 

 Grandmother of her entire innocence in the 

 matter. Even on the following day, when 

 she brought it home, in the original wrapping, 

 she felt herself regarded with secret suspicion. 

 As it never had failed to come on Thursday, 

 why should it, unless Rosemary, for some 

 reason best known to herself, had tampered 

 with the United States Mail? 

 

 There was also a letter, and Rosemary 

 waited eagerly for the postmaster to finish 

 weighing out two pounds of brown sugar and 

 five cents worth of tea for old Mrs. Simms. 

 She pressed her nose to the glass, and squinted, 

 but the address eluded her. Still, she was sure 

 it was for her, and, very probably, from Alden, 

 whom she had not seen for ten days. 

 

 She felt a crushing sense of disappointment 

 when she saw that it was not from Alden, but


 

 I38 dDaster of tbe ti)ine\?aro 

 

 was addressed in an unfamiliar hand. Re 

 gardless of the deference she was accustomed 

 to accord a letter, she tore it open hastily and 

 read: 

 

 "MY DEAR ROSEMARY: 

 "Can you come to tea on Saturday afternoon 

 about four? We have a guest whom I am 

 sure you would like to meet. 

 

 "Affectionately, your 

 

 "MOTHER." 

 

 The words were formal enough, and the 

 quaint stateliness of the handwriting con 

 veyed its own message of reserve and dis 

 tance but the signature thrilled her through 

 and through. "Mother!" she repeated, in a 

 whisper. She went out of the post-office 

 blindly, with the precious missive tightly 

 clasped in her trembling hand. 

 

 Would she go? Of course she would, even 

 though it meant facing Grandmother, Aunt 

 Matilda, and all the dogs of war. 

 

 As the first impulse faded, she became 

 more cautious, and began to consider ways 

 and means. It was obviously impossible to 

 wear brown gingham or brown alpaca to a 

 tea-party. That meant that she must some 

 how get her old white muslin down from the 

 attic, iron it, mend it, and freshen it up as 

 best she could. She had no doubt of her


 

 

 ability to do it, for both old ladies were sound 

 sleepers, and Rosemary had learned to step 

 lightly, in bare feet, upon secret errands 

 around the house at night. 

 

 But how could she hope to escape, unob 

 served, on Saturday afternoon? And, even if 

 she managed to get away, what of the inevitable 

 return? Why not, for once, make a bold 

 declaration of independence, and say, calmly: 

 "Grandmother, I am going to Mrs. Marsh s 

 Saturday afternoon at four, and I am going to 

 wear my white dress." Not "May I go?" or 

 "May I wear it?" but "I am going," and "I 

 am going to wear it." 

 

 At the thought Rosemary shuddered and 

 her soul quailed within her. She knew that 

 she would never dare to do it. At the critical 

 moment her courage would fail her, and she 

 would stay at home. Perhaps she could wear 

 the brown gingham if it were fresh and clean, 

 and she pinned at her throat a bow of the 

 faded pink ribbon she had found in her mother s 

 trunk in the attic. And, if it should happen 

 to rain Saturday, or even look like rain, so 

 much the better. Anyhow, she would go, 

 even in the brown gingham. So much she 

 decided upon. 

 

 Yet, with all her heart, she longed for the 

 white dress, the only thing she had which even 

 approached daintiness. An old saying came 

 back to her in which she had found consola-


 

 140 

 

 

 tion many times before. "When an insur 

 mountable obstacle presents itself, sometimes 

 there is a way around it." And, again, "Take 

 one step forward whenever there is a foothold 

 and trust to God for the next." 

 

 That night, at supper, Aunt Matilda electri 

 fied Grandmother with a bit of news which she 

 had jealously kept to herself all day. 

 

 "The milkman was telling me," she re 

 marked, with an assumed carelessness which 

 deceived no one, " that there s company up to 

 Marshs ." 

 

 Grandmother dropped her knife and fork 

 with a sharp clatter. "You don t tell me!" 

 she cried. "Who in creation is it?" 

 

 "I was minded to tell you before," Aunt 

 Matilda resumed, with tantalising delibera 

 tion, "but you ve had your nose in that fool 

 paper all day, and whenever I spoke to you 

 you told me not to interrupt. Literary folks 

 is terrible afraid of bein interrupted, I ve 

 heard, so I let you alone." 

 

 " I did n t know it was anything important," 

 murmured Grandmother, apologetically. 

 

 " How could you know," questioned Matilda, 

 logically, "before I d told you what it 

 was ? " 

 

 There being no ready answer to this, Grand 

 mother responded with a snort, which meant 

 much or little, as one might choose. A dull 

 red burned on her withered cheeks and she had


 

 

 lost interest in her supper. Only Rosemary 

 was calm. 

 

 "As I was sayin ," Matilda went on, after 

 an aggravating silence, "there s company up 

 to MarshsY 

 

 "Seems to me," Grandmother grunted, 

 "that she d better be payin up the calls she 

 owes in the neighbourhood than entertainin 

 strangers." This shaft pierced a vulnerable 

 spot in Matilda s armour of self-esteem, for 

 she still smarted under Madame Marsh s 

 neglect. 

 

 "The milkman says it s a woman. Her 

 name s Mis Lee. She come a week ago and 

 last Saturday she was to the post-office, and up 

 the river-road all the afternoon in that old 

 phaeton with young Marsh." 

 

 Rosemary s heart paused for a moment, 

 then resumed its beat. 

 

 "She s a play-actin person, he says, or at 

 any rate she looks like one, which amounts 

 to the same thing. She s brought four trunks 

 with her one respectable trunk, same as any 

 body might have, one big square trunk that 

 looks like a dog-house, and another big trunk 

 that a person could move into if there was n t 

 no other house handy, and another trunk that 

 was packed so full that it had bulged out on all 

 sides but one, and when Jim and Dick took 

 it up into the attic there was n t but one side 

 they could set it on. And whiles they was


 

 142 

 

 

 Servant s 

 

 iSoeetp 

 

 findin a place to set it, she and young Marsh 

 was laughin down in the hall." 

 

 "Who is she?" demanded Grandmother. 

 "Where did she come from? How long is she 

 goin to stay? Where d Mis Marsh get to 

 know her?" 

 

 "The milkman s wife was over last Mon 

 day," Matilda continued, "to help with the 

 washin , and she says she never see such 

 clothes in all her born days nor so many of em. 

 They was mostly lace, and she had two white 

 petticoats in the wash. The stockin s was all 

 silk, and she said she never see such night 

 gowns. They was fine enough for best summer 

 dresses, and all lace, and one of em had a 

 blue satin bow on it, and what was strangest 

 of all was that there wa n t noplace to get into 

 em. They was made just like stockin s with 

 no feet to em, and if she wore em, she d 

 have to crawl in, either at the bottom or the 

 top. She said she never see the beat of those 

 nightgowns." 

 

 "Do tell!" ejaculated Grandmother. 

 

 "And her hair looks as if she ain t never 

 combed it since the day she was born. The 

 milkman says it looks about like a hen s nest 

 and is pretty much the same colour. He see 

 her on the porch for a minute, and all he could 

 look at was that hair. And when he passed em 

 on the river-road after they come from the 

 post-office, he could n t see her hair at all,


 

 

 143 

 

 cause she had on a big hat tied on with some 

 

 thin light blue stuff. He reckoned maybe Qt *^ 

 

 her hair was a wig." 

 

 " I d know whether t was a wig or not, if I 

 saw it once," Grandmother muttered. "There 

 ain t nobody that can fool me about false 

 hair." 

 

 " I guess you ain t likely to see it," retorted 

 Matilda, viciously. "All we ll ever hear 

 about her 11 be from the milk folks." 

 

 "Maybe I could see her," ventured Rose 

 mary, cautiously. " I could put on my best 

 white dress and go to see Mrs. Marsh, to 

 morrow or next day, after I get the work done 

 up. I could find out who she was and all 

 about her, and come back and tell you." 

 

 For an instant the stillness was intense, 

 then both women turned to her. "You!" 

 they said, scornfully, in the same breath. 

 

 " Yes," said Grandmother, after an impres 

 sive pause, " I reckon you 11 be puttin on 

 your best dress and goin up to Marshs to see 

 a play-actin woman." 

 

 " You d have lots to do," continued Aunt 

 Matilda, "goin to see a woman what ain t seen 

 fit to return a call your Aunt made on her 

 more n five years ago." 

 

 "Humph!" Grandmother snorted. 

 

 "The very idea," exclaimed Aunt Matilda. 

 

 What had seemed to Rosemary like an open 

 path had merely led to an insurmountable


 

 144 

 

 /iDastet ot tbe 

 

 stone wall. She shrugged her shoulders good- 

 humouredly. "Very well," she said, "I m 

 sure I don t care. Suit yourselves." 

 

 She began to clear away the supper dishes, 

 for, though the others had eaten little, they 

 had apparently finished. Out in the kitchen, 

 she sang as she worked, and only a close 

 observer would have detected a tremor in 

 the sweet, untrained, soprano. "Anyway," 

 thought Rosemary, " I 11 put on the flat- 

 irons." 

 

 The fire she had built would not go out for 

 some hours. She had used coal ruinously in 

 order to heat the oven for a special sort of tea- 

 biscuit of which Grandmother was very fond. 

 While the fire was going out, it would heat the 

 irons, and then 

 

 "One step forward whenever there is a foot 

 hold," she said to herself, "and trust to God 

 for the next." 

 

 That night, as fortune would have it, 

 Grandmother and Aunt Matilda elected to sit 

 up late, solving a puzzle in The Household 

 Guardian for which a Mission rocker was 

 offered as a prize. It was long past ten 

 o clock when they gave it up. 

 

 "1 dunno," yawned Aunt Matilda, "as I m 

 partial to rockers." 

 

 "Leastways," continued Grandmother, ris 

 ing to put her spectacles on the mantel, "to 

 the kind they give missionaries. I ve seen


 

 

 the things they send missionaries more n 

 once, in my time." 

 

 By eleven, the household slept, except 

 Rosemary, As silently as a ghost, she made 

 her way to the attic, brought down the clean 

 white muslin, and, with irons scarcely hot 

 enough, pressed it into some semblance of 

 freshness. She hung it in her closet, under the 

 brown alpaca of two seasons past, and went 

 to sleep, peacefully. 

 

 Bright and early the next morning the Idea 

 presented itself. Why not put on the white 

 gown with one of the brown ones over it and 

 take off the brown one when she got there? 

 Mrs. Marsh would understand. 

 

 Rosemary laughed happily as she climbed 

 out of bed. Surely there was more than one 

 way of cheating Fate! That afternoon, while 

 the others took their accustomed "forty 

 winks," she brought down the faded pink 

 ribbon that had been her mother s. That 

 night she discovered that neither of the 

 brown ginghams would go over the white 

 muslin, as they had shrunk when they were 

 washed, but that the alpaca would. There 

 was not even a bit of white showing beneath 

 the skirt, as she had discovered by tilting her 

 mirror perilously forward. 

 

 She was up early Saturday morning, and 

 baked and swept and dusted to such good pur 

 pose that, by three o clock, there was nothing


 

 146 flDaster of tbe Wne^aro 

 

 tmngfn more that anyone could think of for her 

 

 to do until it was time to get supper. She 

 Calance 

 

 had put the white gown on under the alpaca 

 

 when she dressed in the morning, as it was the 

 only opportunity of which she was at all sure. 

 

 Grandmother and Aunt Matilda were nod 

 ding in their chairs. The kitchen clock struck 

 the half hour. Finally, Rosemary spoke. 

 

 "Is there anything either of you would like 

 me to get at the store?" 

 

 "No," said Grandmother. 

 

 "No," echoed Aunt Matilda. Then she 

 added: "Why? Were you thinkin of goin 

 out?" 

 

 "I thought I would," said Rosemary, with 

 a yawn, "if there was nothing more for me to 

 do. It s such a nice day, and I d like a 

 breath of fresh air." 

 

 For a moment, Fate hung in the balance, 

 then Grandmother said, generously: "Go 

 on, Rosemary, and get all the fresh air you 

 want. You ve worked better n common 

 to-day." 

 

 " I should think you d be tired enough to 

 stay home and rest," Aunt Matilda com 

 mented, fretfully, but the door had closed on 

 the last word, and Rosemary was gone. 

 

 "But April s sun strikes down the glades to-day; 

 So shut your eyes upturned, and feel my kiss 

 Creep, as the Spring now thrills through every spray 

 Up your warm throat to your warm lips ".


 

 

 The beautiful words sang themselves through 

 her memory as she sped on. She had forgot 

 ten about the guest for the moment, remem 

 bering with joy that almost hurt, the one 

 word "Mother," and the greater, probable 

 joy that overshadowed it. Of course he would 

 be there! Why not, when he knew she was 

 coming to tea and when they had a guest, 

 too? The girl s heart beat tumultuously as 

 she neared the house, for through it, in great 

 tides, surged fear, and ecstasy and love. 

 

 Madame herself opened the door. "Come 

 in, dear!" 

 

 "Oh, Mrs. Marsh! Please, just a minute!" 

 

 "Mrs. Marsh again? I thought we were 

 mother and daughter. Edith!" she called. 

 Then, in the next moment, Rosemary found 

 herself in the living-room, offering a rough, 

 red hand to an exquisite creature who seemed 

 a blurred mass of pale green and burnished 

 gold, redolent of violets, and who murmured, 

 in a beautifully modulated contralto: "How 

 do you do, Miss Starr! I am very glad to 

 meet you." 

 

 The consciousness of the white gown under 

 neath filled Rosemary s eyes with tears of 

 mortification, which Madame hastened to 

 explain. "It s raw and cold still," she said, 

 "in spite of the calendar. These keen Spring 

 winds make one s eyes water. Here, my dear, 

 have a cup of tea."


 

 148 

 

 /Raster of tbe 

 

 Bn 

 

 tluconis 

 

 fortablc 

 

 afternoon 

 

 Rosemary took the cup with hands that 

 trembled, and, while she sipped the amber 

 fragrance of it, struggled hard for self-posses 

 sion. Madame ignored her for the moment 

 and chatted pleasantly with Edith. Then 

 Alden came in and shook hands kindly with 

 Rosemary, though he had been secretly 

 annoyed when he learned she was coming. 

 Afterward, he had a bad quarter of an hour 

 with himself while he endeavoured to find out 

 why. At last he had shifted the blame to 

 Edith, deciding that she would think Rose 

 mary awkward and countrified, and that it 

 would not be pleasant for him to stand by and 

 see it. 

 

 However, the most carping critic could have 

 found no fault with Edith s manner. If she 

 felt any superiority, she did not show it. She 

 accorded to Rosemary the same perfect 

 courtesy she showed Madame, and, apparently, 

 failed to notice that the girl had not spoken 

 since the moment of introduction. 

 

 She confined the conversation wholly to 

 things Rosemary must have been familiar 

 with the country, the cool winds that some 

 times came when one thought it was almost 

 Summer, the perfect blend of Madame s tea, 

 the quaint Chinese pot, and the bad manners 

 of the canary, who seemed to take a fiendish 

 delight in scattering the seed that was given 

 him to eat.


 

 

 Rosemary merely sat in the corner, tried to 

 smile, and said, as required, "Yes," or "No." 

 Alden, pitying her from the depths of his 

 heart and yet secretly ashamed, tried unsuc 

 cessfully, now and then, to draw her into the 

 conversation. 

 

 Edith drained her cup, affected disappoint 

 ment at finding no stray leaves by which she 

 might divine the future, then went to Rose 

 mary, and took the empty cup which she sat 

 holding with pathetic awkwardness. 

 

 "You have none, either, Miss Starr," she 

 said, sweetly. "Suppose we try the crystal 

 ball? I ve been wanting to do it ever since I 

 came, but was afraid to venture, alone." 

 

 Rosemary, her senses whirling, followed her 

 over to the table, where the ball lay on its bit 

 of black velvet. 

 

 "How do you do it?" asked Edith, of 

 Madame. 

 

 "Just get into a good light, shade your eyes, 

 and look in." 

 

 "That s easy," Edith said. She bent over 

 the table, shaded her eyes with her white, 

 beautifully-kept hands, and peered into the 

 crystalline depths. "There s nothing here," 

 she continued, somewhat fretfully, to Alden, 

 "except you. By some trick of reflection, I 

 could see you as plainly as though it were a 

 mirror. You try, Miss Starr." 

 

 Madame s heart contracted suddenly as she


 

 150 flDaster of tbe DtneparO 

 

 remembered the day she had looked into the 

 crystal ball, and had seen not only Alden, but 

 a woman with flaming red hair, clasped closely 

 in his arms. "It s all nonsense," she tried to 

 say, but her stiff lips would not move. 

 

 Rosemary left the table and went back to 

 her corner. "What did you see?" queried 

 Edith. "Did you have any better luck than 

 1 did?" 

 

 "No," Rosemary answered, with a degree 

 more of self-possession than she had shown 

 previously. "There was nothing there but a 

 black cloud." 

 

 The task of keeping up the conversation fell 

 to Edith and Alden, for Madame had uncon 

 sciously withdrawn into herself as some small 

 animals shut themselves into their shells. All 

 were relieved, though insensibly, when Rose 

 mary said she must go. 

 

 Alden went into the hall with her, to help 

 her with her coat and hat, and, as opportunity 

 offered, to kiss her twice, shyly, on her cheek. 

 He wanted to go part way home with her, but 

 Rosemary refused. 

 

 "You d better not," she said, "but thank 

 you just as much." 

 

 "Won t you even let me go to the corner 

 with you?" 

 

 "No," said Rosemary, with trembling lips, 

 "please don t." 

 

 So she went on alone, while Alden returned


 

 

 to the living-room. Edith was saying to 

 Madame: "Poor little brown mouse! How 

 one longs to take a girl like that and give her 

 all the pretty things she needs!" 

 

 Madame took the crystal ball, wrapped it in 

 its bit of velvet, and put it on the highest shelf 

 of the bookcase, rolling it back behind the 

 books, out of sight. 

 

 "Why do you do that, Mother?" asked 

 Alden, curiously. "Because," returned Ma 

 dame, grimly, "it s all nonsense. I won t 

 have it around any more." 

 

 Alden laughed, but Edith went on, thought 

 fully: "I d like to do her hair for her, and 

 see that all her under-things were right, and 

 then put her into a crepe gown of dull blue 

 a sort of Chinese blue, with a great deal of 

 deep-toned lace for trimming, and give her a 

 topaz pendant set in dull silver, and a big 

 picture hat of ecru net, with a good deal of the 

 lace on it, and one long plume, a little lighter 

 than the gown." 

 

 "I would, too," said Alden, smiling at 

 Edith. He did not in the least know what 

 she was talking about, but he knew that she 

 felt kindly toward Rosemary, and was grateful 

 for it. 

 

 Rosemary, at home, went about her duties 

 mechanically. There was a far-away look in 

 her eyes which did not escape the notice of 

 Grandmother and Aunt Matilda, but they


 

 152 /toaster of tbe 

 

 tieartc forebore to comment upon it as long as she 

 performed her tasks acceptably. At supper 

 she ate very little, and that little was as dust 

 and ashes in her mouth. 

 

 Before her, continually, was a heart-break 

 ing contrast. She, awkward, ugly, ill at ease 

 in brown alpaca made according to the fashion 

 of ten or fifteen years ago, and Mrs. Lee, 

 beautiful, exquisite&amp;gt; dainty to her finger-tips, 

 richly dowered with every conceivable thing 

 that she herself lacked. 

 

 "Mother," said Rosemary, to herself. "Oh, 

 Mother!" She did not mean Mrs. Marsh, but 

 the pretty, girlish mother who had died in giv 

 ing birth to her. She would have been like 

 Mrs. Lee, or prettier, and she would have 

 understood. 

 

 Her heart smarted and burned and ached, 

 but she got through the evening somehow, 

 and, at the appointed time, stumbled up to 

 her own room. 

 

 Why should she care because another 

 woman was prettier than she, knew more, and 

 had more ? Were there not many such in the 

 world, and had she not Alden? Accidentally, 

 Rosemary came upon the cause of her pain. 

 

 Of course she had Alden, for always 

 unless then, once more, reassurance came. 

 "She s married," said Rosemary, smiling 

 back at the white, frightened face she saw in 

 the mirror. "She s married ! "


 

 

 153 

 

 The thought carried with it so much com 

 fort that presently Rosemary slept peace 

 fully, exhausted, as she was, by the stress 

 of the afternoon. "She s married," was her 

 last conscious thought, and a smile lingered 

 upon her lips as she slept. She had not enough 

 worldly wisdom to know that, other things 

 being equal, a married woman may be a dan 

 gerous rival, having the unholy charm of the 

 unattainable, and the sanction of another 

 man s choice. 

 

 tTbe 

 

 Comforto 

 ing 

 

 "Cbougbt


 

 154 

 

 Hwahe (n 

 

 tbe TUabt 

 

 XI 

 

 Gbe Ibour of tbe (Turning TOgbt 

 

 THE darkness was vibrant, keen, alive. 

 It throbbed with consciousness, with 

 mysterious fibres of communication. There 

 was no sense of a presence in the room, nor 

 even the possibility of a presence. It was 

 vague, abstract, yet curiously definite. 

 

 Edith woke from a troubled dream with a 

 start. For a moment she lay quietly and 

 listened, not afraid, but interested, as though 

 upon the threshold of some new experience. 

 The scurrying feet of mice made a ghostly 

 patter in the attic, above her room, and a 

 vagrant wind, in passing, tapped at her win 

 dow with the fairy-like fingers of the vine 

 that clung to the wall. 

 

 Otherwise all was still, and yet the darkness 

 trembled with expectancy. Something hither 

 to unknown seemed to have entered her con 

 sciousness, some thought, emotion, instinct, 

 or what? Wide awake, staring into space, she 

 lay there, wondering, waiting, not in the least 

 frightened, but assured of shelter and of peace.


 

 "fcour ot tbe turning fligbt 155 

 

 Gradually she had lost consciousness of her anotbec 

 body. She had relaxed completely and her 

 mind soared, free. She moved one foot, 

 cautiously, to see whether her body was still 

 there, and smiled when she was reassured by 

 the cool smoothness of the linen sheet, and the 

 other warm little foot she touched in moving. 

 

 Somewhere, in this same darkness, was 

 another personality. Of so much she event 

 ually became sure. It was not in the room, 

 perhaps not even in the house, but for someone 

 else, somewhere, was this same sense of 

 communication? No, but rather the possibil 

 ity of it. 

 

 Someone else had also lost consciousness 

 of the body. Another mind, released for the 

 moment from its earthly prison, sought com 

 munion with hers. Was this death, and had 

 she wakened in another world? She moved 

 her foot again, pressed her hand to the warm 

 softness of her breast, felt her breath come 

 and go, and even the steady beating of her 

 heart. Not death, then, only a pause, in 

 which for once the body, clamorous and 

 imperious with its thousand needs, had given 

 way to the soul. 

 

 The curious sense of another personality 

 persisted. Was this other person dead, and 

 striving mutely for expression? No, surely 

 not, for this other mind was on the same plane 

 as hers, subject to the same conditions. Not


 

 i 5 6 jflDaster of tbe Wnegarfc 

 

 Hew disembodied entirely, but only relaxed, as 

 she was, this other personality had wakened 

 and found itself gloriously free. 

 

 A perception of fineness followed. Not 

 everyone was capable of this, and the convic 

 tion brought a pleasant sense of superiority. 

 Above the sordid world, in some higher realm 

 of space and thought, they two had met, and 

 saluted one another. 

 

 For the first time Edith thought of her 

 body as something separate from herself, 

 and in the light of a necessary or unnecessary 

 evil. This new self neither hungered nor 

 thirsted nor grew weary; it knew neither cold 

 nor heat nor illness; pain, like a fourth 

 dimension, was out of its comprehension, it 

 required neither clothes nor means of trans 

 portation, it simply went, as the wind might, 

 by its own power, when and where it chose. 

 

 Whose mind was it? Was it someone she 

 knew, or someone she was yet to meet ? And 

 in what bodily semblance did it dwell, when 

 it was housed in its prison ? Was it a woman, 

 or a man? Not a woman Edith instantly 

 dismissed the idea, for this sense of another 

 personality carried with it not the feeling of 

 duality or likeness, but of difference, of divine 

 completion. 

 

 Some man she knew, or whom she was to 

 know, freed for the moment from his earthly 

 environment, roamed celestial ways with her.


 

 TTbe 1bour of tbe Uurnina 

 

 157 

 

 She was certain that it was not lasting, that, 

 at the best, it could be of very brief duration, 

 and this fact of impermanence was the very 

 essence of its charm, like life itself. 

 

 The clock downstairs began to strike one, 

 two, three four. It was the hour of the night 

 when life is at its lowest, the point on the 

 flaming arc of human existence where it 

 touches the shadow of the unknown, softening 

 into death or brightening into life according 

 to the swing of the pendulum. Then, if ever, 

 the mind and body would be apart, Edith 

 thought, for when the physical forces sink, the 

 spirit must rise to keep the balance true. 

 

 Who was the man? Her husband? No, 

 for they were too far apart to meet like this. 

 She idly went over the list of her men ac 

 quaintances old schoolmates, friends of her 

 husband s, husbands of her friends, as one 

 might call the roll of an assembly, expecting 

 someone to rise and answer "Here." 

 

 Yet it was all in vain, though she felt her 

 self on the right track and approaching a 

 definite solution. The darkness clung about 

 her like a living thing. It throbbed as the 

 air may when a wireless instrument answers 

 another, leagues away; it was as eloquent of 

 communication as a network of telephone 

 and telegraph wires, submerged in midnight, 

 yet laden with portent of life and death. 

 

 She sat up in bed, straining every nerve 

 

 IQbotOag 

 tbe /Dan?


 

 158 /IDaster ot tbe 

 

 to the point where all senses unite in one. 

 "Who are you?" Her lips did not move, 

 but the thought seemed to have the sound of 

 thunder in its imperious demand. Tangled 

 fibres of communication noiselessly wove 

 themselves through the darkness, and again 

 all her soul merged itself into one question 

 " Who ? For God s sake, who ? " 

 

 Then, after a tense instant of waiting, the 

 answer flashed upon her, vivid as lightning: 

 "Alden Marsh!" 

 

 And swiftly, as though in response to a call, 

 a definite, conscious thought from the other 

 personality presented itself: "Yes? What 

 would you have of me?" 

 

 Edith lay back among her pillows, as the 

 clock struck the half hour. The body, as 

 though resentful of denial, urged itself swiftly 

 upon her now. Her heart beat tumultuously, 

 her hands shook, she thrilled from head to 

 foot with actual physical pain. The darkness 

 no longer seemed alive, but negative and dead, 

 holding somewhere in its merciful depths the 

 promise of rest. 

 

 Utterly exhausted, she closed her eyes and 

 slept, to be roused by a tap at her door. 

 

 " Yes," she answered, drowsily, "come in!" 

 

 Madame came in, pulled up the shades and 

 flooded the room with sunshine. " I m sorry 

 if I ve disturbed you, dear, but I was afraid 

 you were ill. I ve been here twice before."


 

 1bour ot tbe burning ttfgbt 

 

 Edith sat up and rubbed her eyes. "What 

 time is it?" 

 

 "Half-past nine." 

 

 "Oh, I m so sorry! You mustn t spoil me 

 this way, for I do want to get up to breakfast. 

 Why did n t you call me?" 

 

 Madame sat down on the side of the bed 

 and patted Edith s outstretched hand with 

 affectionate reassurance. " You re to do just 

 as you please," she said, "but I was beginning 

 to worry a bit, for you ve been the soul of 

 punctuality." 

 

 "Did Edith closed her lips firmly upon 

 the instinctive question, "Did he miss me?" 

 She dismissed it as the mere vapouring of a 

 vacant brain. 

 

 "Did what?" asked Madame, Jielpfully. 

 

 "Did you miss me?" 

 

 "Of course. Alden did too. The last 

 thing he said before he went to school was 

 that he hoped you were not ill." 

 

 "That was nice of him." Edith put a small 

 pink foot out of bed on the other side and 

 gazed at it pensively. Madame laughed. 

 

 "I don t believe you ve grown up," she 

 said. " You remind me of a small child, who 

 has just discovered her toes. Do you want 

 your breakfast up here?" 

 

 "No, I 11 come down. Give me half an 

 hour and I 11 appear before you, clothed and 

 in my right mind, with as humble an apology


 

 i6o 

 

 flDaster of tbe tittneparo 

 

 Call of tbc 

 

 TOlanl&amp;gt;ers 

 

 lust 

 

 for my sins as I m able to compose in the 

 meantime." 

 

 She was as good as her word, appearing 

 promptly at the time she had set, and dressed 

 for the street. After doing justice to a hearty 

 breakfast, she said that she was going out for 

 a walk and probably would not be back to 

 luncheon. 

 

 "My dear!" exclaimed Madame. "You 

 must n t do that. I 11 have luncheon kept 

 for you." 

 

 "No, please don t, for I really shan t want 

 any. Did n t you observe my breakfast? 

 Even a piano-mover could n t think of eating 

 again before seven, so let me go a-gypsying 

 till sunset." 

 

 Madame nodded troubled acquiescence, and, 

 with a laugh, Edith kissed her good-bye. 

 "I m subject to the Wander-lust," she said, 

 r and when the call comes, I have to go. It s 

 in my blood to-day, so farewell for the 

 present." 

 

 Madame watched her as she went down 

 the street, the golden quill on her green hat 

 bidding jaunty defiance to the wind. As she 

 had said, she felt the call at times, and had 

 to yield to its imperative summons, but to-day 

 it was her soul that craved the solace of the 

 open spaces and the wind-swept fields. 

 

 As she dressed, she had tried to dismiss 

 last night s experience as a mere fantasy of


 

 fbour of tbe Uurning 

 

 sleep, or, if not an actual dream, some vision 

 hailing from the borderland of consciousness, 

 at the point where the senses merge. Yet, 

 even as she argued with herself, she felt the 

 utter futility of it, and knew her denials were 

 vain in the face of truth. 

 

 She dreaded the necessity of meeting Alden 

 again, then made a wry face at her own 

 foolishness. "Ridiculous," she said to her 

 self, "preposterous, absurd!" No matter what 

 her own nightmares might be, he slept soundly 

 of course he did. How could healthy 

 youth with a clear conscience do otherwise? 

 

 For an hour or more, she kept to the streets 

 f the village, with the sublime unconscious 

 ness of the city-bred, too absorbed in her own 

 thoughts to know that she was stared at and 

 freely commented upon by those to whom a 

 stranger was a source of excitement. Her 

 tailored gown, of dark green broadcloth, the 

 severe linen shirtwaist, and her simple hat, 

 were subjects of conversation that night in 

 more than one humble home, fading into 

 insignificance only before her radiant hair. 

 The general opinion was that it must be a 

 wig, or the untoward results of some experi 

 ment with hair-dye, probably the latter, for, 

 as the postmaster s wife said, "nobody would 

 buy a wig of that colour." 

 

 The school bell rang for dismissal, and filled 

 her with sudden panic. After walking through


 

 162 

 

 dDaster of tbe Dineparfc 

 

 ube 

 tbclRefc 

 

 the village all the morning to escape luncheon 

 with Alden, it would be disagreeable to meet 

 him face to face almost at the schoolhouse 

 door. Turning in the opposite direction, she 

 walked swiftly until she came to a hill, upon 

 which an irregular path straggled half-heart 

 edly upward. 

 

 So Edith climbed the Hill of the Muses, 

 pausing several times to rest. When she 

 reached the top, she was agreeably surprised 

 to find a comfortable seat waiting her, even 

 though it was only a log rolled back against 

 two trees. She sank back into the hollow, 

 leaned against the supporting oak, and wiped 

 her flushed face. 

 

 Others had been there before her, evidently, 

 for the turf was worn around the log, and 

 there were even hints of footprints here and 

 there. "Some rural trysting place, prob 

 ably," she thought, then a gleam of scarlet 

 caught her attention. A small red book had 

 fallen into the crevice between the log and the 

 other tree. "The House of Life," she mur 

 mured, under her breath. "Now, who in 

 this little village would unless " 

 

 The book bore neither name nor initials, 

 but almost every page was marked. As it 

 happened, most of them were favourite pas 

 sages of her own. "How idyllic!" she mused; 

 "a pair of young lovers reading Rossetti on a 

 hill-top in Spring! Could anything be more


 

 ZTbe f)our of tbe burning 

 

 pastoral? I 11 take it back to the house and 

 tell about it at dinner." 

 

 She welcomed it as a sure relief from a pos 

 sible awkward moment. "I knew I was 

 right," she said to herself, as she turned the 

 pages. "To-day was set aside, long ago, for 

 me to go a-gypsying." 

 

 The clear air of the heights and the sunlit 

 valley beneath her gave her a sense of pro 

 portion and of value which she realised she 

 had sadly needed. Free from the annoyances 

 of her daily life, she could look back upon it 

 with due perspective, and see that her unhappi- 

 ness had been largely caused by herself. 

 

 " I can t be miserable," she thought, "unless 

 I m willing to be." 

 

 She sat there for a long time, heedless of 

 the passing hours. She was roused from her 

 reverie by a muffled footstep and an involun 

 tary exclamation of astonishment. 

 

 "Why, how do you do, Miss Starr?" said 

 Edith, kindly, offering a well-gloved hand. 

 "Are you out gypsying too?" 

 

 " Yes," Rosemary stammered. Her eyes 

 were fixed upon the small red book that Mrs. 

 Lee held in her other hand. 

 

 "See what I found," Edith went on, heed 

 lessly. "Rossetti s House of Life, up here. 

 Boy Blue must have brought it up to read to 

 Bo-Peep in the intervals of shepherding. 

 There may not be any such word as shep-


 

 1 64 flDaster ot tbe 

 

 herding, but there ought to be. I love to 

 make words, don t you?" 

 

 "Yes," said Rosemary, helplessly. She 

 had thought Alden had the book, but had 

 forgotten to make sure, and now the most 

 precious hours of her life had been invaded 

 and her shrines laid bare. Was it not enough 

 for this woman to live in the same house with 

 Alden? Need she take possession of the Hill 

 of the Muses and the little book which had 

 first awakened her, then brought them to 

 gether? Resentful anger burned in her cheeks, 

 all the more pitiful because of Mrs. Lee s 

 utter unconsciousness, and the impossibility 

 of reparation, even had she known. 

 

 "Sit down," Edith suggested. "You must 

 be tired. It s a long climb." 

 

 "Did did you come up here to to meet 

 anyone?" The suspicion broke hotly from 

 Rosemary s pale lips. 

 

 Edith might have replied that she came up 

 to avoid meeting anyone, but she only said, 

 with cool astonishment: "Why, no. Why 

 should I?" 

 

 There was no answer to that. Indeed, 

 thought Rosemary, floundering helplessly in 

 a sea of pain, there was no reason. Was she 

 not in the same house with him, day in and 

 day out? 

 

 "She s married," Rosemary said to herself 

 with stern insistence, trying to find comfort


 

 TTbe "toour of tbe turning TRigbt 

 

 in the thought, but comfort strangely failed 

 now. Another suspicion assailed her and was 

 instantly put into headlong speech. "Is 

 your husband dead, or are you divorced?" 

 

 Mrs. Lee turned quickly. She surveyed the 

 girl calmly for an instant, entirely unable to 

 translate her evident confusion; then she rose. 

 

 "Neither," she returned, icily, "and if there 

 are no other personal questions you desire to 

 ask me, I 11 go back." 

 

 Rosemary kept back the tears until Mrs. 

 Lee was out of sight. "She s married," she 

 sobbed, "and he is n t dead, and they re not 

 divorced, so why oh, why?" The pain 

 unreasonably persisted, taking to itself -a fresh 

 hold. She had offended Mrs. Lee and she 

 would tell Alden, and Alden would be dis 

 pleased and would never forgive her. 

 

 If she were to run after her, and apologise, 

 assuring her that she had not meant the 

 slightest offence, perhaps . She stumbled to 

 her feet, but, even as she did so, she knew 

 that it was too late. She longed with all the 

 passion of her desolate soul for Alden s arms 

 around her, for only the touch of his hand or 

 the sound of his voice, saying: "Rosemary! 

 Rosemary dear!" But it was too late for that 

 also everything came too late ! 

 

 By the time she reached the foot of the hill 

 Edith had understood and pardoned Rose-


 

 166 

 

 /Caster of tbe IDinegaro 

 

 mary. "Poor child," she thought. "Think 

 of her loving him, and actually being jeal 

 ous of me ! And, man-like, of course, he s 

 never noticed it. For her sake, I hope he 

 won t." 

 

 She waited to gather a spray or two of wild 

 crab-apple blossoms, then went home. She 

 did not see Alden, but stopped to exchange a 

 few words with Madame, then went on up 

 stairs. The long walk had wearied her, but 

 it had also made her more lovely. After an 

 hour of rest and a cool shower, she was ready 

 to dress for dinner. 

 

 She chose a dinner-gown of white embroid 

 ered chiffon that she had not yet worn. It 

 was cut away a little at the throat and the 

 sleeves came to the elbow. She was not in the 

 mood for jewels, but she clasped a string of 

 pearls around her perfect throat, and put the 

 crab-apple blossoms in her hair. The experi 

 ment was rather daring, but wholly successful, 

 as she took care to have green leaves between 

 her hair and the blossoms. 

 

 When she went down, Madame and Alden 

 were waiting for her, Alden in evening clothes 

 as usual and Madame in her lavender gown. 

 

 "You look like a nymph of Botticelli s," 

 commented Alden, with a smile. There was 

 no trace of confusion, or even of conscious 

 ness in his manner, and, once again, Edith 

 reproached herself for her foolishness.


 

 Ubc t&amp;gt;our of tbe burning 

 

 Dinner was cheerful, though not lively. 

 Once or twice, Edith caught Alden looking 

 at her with a strange expression on his face. 

 Madame chattered on happily, of the vineyard 

 and the garden and the small household 

 affairs that occupied her attention. 

 

 Afterward, Alden read the paper and the 

 other two played cribbage. It was only a 

 little after nine when Madame, concealing a 

 yawn, announced that she was tired and would 

 go to bed, if she might be excused. 

 

 Edith rose with alacrity. " I 11 come, too," 

 she said. "It s astonishing how sleepy it 

 makes one to be outdoors." 

 

 "Don t," Madame protested. "We must n t 

 leave him entirely alone. You can sleep late 

 to-morrow morning if you choose." 

 

 "Please don t leave me alone, Mrs. Lee," 

 pleaded Alden, rather wickedly. 

 

 "All right," Edith answered, accepting the 

 inevitable as gracefully as she might. "Shall 

 I play solitaire while you read the paper?" 

 

 " If you like," he replied. 

 

 Madame took her candle and bade them 

 good-night. As she went up-stairs, Edith said, 

 with a pout: "I wish I were going to bed 

 too." 

 

 "You can t sleep all the time," he reminded 

 her. The paper had slipped to the floor. 

 "Mother tells me that you slept this morning 

 until half-past nine."


 

 168 

 

 flDaster of tbe 

 

 "Yes but ." She bit her lips and the 

 colour rose to her temples. She hastily 

 shuffled the cards and began to play solitaire 

 so rapidly that he wondered whether she knew 

 what cards she was playing. 

 

 "But," he said, "you did n t sleep well last 

 night. Was that what you were going to 

 say?" 

 

 Edith dropped her cards, and looked him 

 straight in the face. "I slept perfectly," she 

 lied. "Did n t you?" 

 

 " I slept just as well as you did," he answered. 

 She thought she detected a shade of double 

 meaning in his tone. 

 

 " I had a long walk to-day," she went on, 

 "and it made me sleepy. Look," she 

 continued, going to the mantel where she 

 had left the book. "See what I found on 

 top of a hill, in a crevice between an oak and 

 a log that lay against it. Do you think some 

 pair of rural lovers left it there?" 

 

 "Possibly," he replied. If the sight of the 

 book he had loaned Rosemary awoke any 

 emotion, or even a memory, he did not show 

 it. "Sit down," he suggested, imperturbably, 

 "and let me see if I can t find a sonnet 

 that fits you. Yes, surely here it is. 

 Listen." 

 

 She rested her head upon her hand and 

 turned her face away from him. In his 

 smooth, well-modulated voice, he read :


 

 ZIbe 1bour of tbe burning IRigbt 

 

 HER GIFTS 

 

 High grace, the dower of queens; and therewithal 

 

 Some wood-born wonder s sweet simplicity; 

 

 A glance like water brimming with the sky 

 Or hyacinth-light where forest shadows fall; 

 Such thrilling pallor of cheek as doth enthral 

 

 The heart; a mouth whose passionate forms imply 

 

 All music and all silence held thereby; 

 Deep golden locks, her sovereign coronal; 

 A round reared neck, meet column of Love s shrine 

 

 To cling to when the heart takes sanctuary; 

 

 Hands which forever at Love s bidding be, 

 And soft-stirred feet still answering to his sign :- 

 

 These are her gifts, as tongue may tell them o er. 

 

 Breathe low her name, my soul, for that means more. 

 

 Her heart beat wildly and her colour came 

 and went, but, with difficulty, she controlled 

 herself until he reached the end. When she 

 rose, he rose also, dropping the book. 

 

 "Mrs. Lee Edith!" 

 

 "Yes," she said, with a supreme effort at 

 self-command, "it is a pretty name, is n t it?" 

 She was very pale, but she offered him her 

 hand. "I really must go now," she con 

 tinued, "for I am tired. Thank you and 

 good-night." 

 

 Alden did not answer in words. He took 

 the hand she offered him, held it firmly in his 

 own, stooped, and kissed the hollow of her 

 elbow, just below the sleeve.


 

 i yo 

 

 Ho 

 Guarantee 

 

 XII 

 

 Hot Hnswer 

 

 SHE S married, and he is n t dead, and 

 they re not divorced. She s married 

 and he is n t dead, and they re not divorced." 

 Rosemary kept saying it to herself mechan 

 ically, but no comfort came. Through the 

 long night, wakeful and wretched, she brooded 

 over the painful difference between the 

 woman to whom Alden had plighted his troth 

 and the beautiful stranger whom he saw every 

 day. 

 

 "She s married," Rosemary whispered, 

 to the coarse unbleached muslin of her pillow. 

 "And when we re married ah, it would 

 all be different then. But would it? In a 

 flash she perceived that marriage itself guar 

 antees nothing in the way of love. 

 

 Hurt to her heart s core, Rosemary sat up 

 in bed and pondered, while the tears streamed 

 over her cheeks. She had not seen Alden 

 since Mrs. Lee came, except the day she had 

 gone there to tea, wearing her white muslin 

 under her brown alpaca. There was no way


 

 Hot answer 

 

 to see him, unless she went there again the 

 very thought of that made her shudder or 

 signalled from her hill-top with the scarlet 

 ribbon. 

 

 And, to her, the Hill of the Muses was like 

 some holy place that had been profaned. The 

 dainty feet of the stranger had set themselves 

 upon her path in more ways than one. What 

 must life be out in the world, when the world 

 was full of women like Mrs. Lee, perhaps even 

 more beautiful? Was everyone, married or 

 not, continually stabbed by some heartbreak 

 ing difference between herself and another? 

 

 Having the gift of detachment immeasur 

 ably beyond woman, man may separate him 

 self from his grief, contemplate it calmly in 

 its various phases, and, with a mighty effort, 

 throw it aside. Woman, on the contrary, 

 hugs hers close to her aching breast and re 

 morselessly turns the knife in her wound. 

 It is she who keeps anniversaries, walks in 

 cemeteries, wears mourning, and preserves 

 trifles that sorrowfully have outlasted the 

 love that gave them. 

 

 If she could only see him once! And yet, 

 what was there to say or what was there to 

 do, beyond sobbing out her desolate heart in 

 the shelter of his arms? Could she tell him 

 that she was miserable because she had come 

 face to face with a woman more beautiful 

 than she; that she doubted his loyalty, his


 

 172 

 

 flDaster ot tbe 

 

 HHorn an6 

 

 devotion? From some far off ancestor, her 

 woman s dower of pride and silence suddenly 

 asserted itself in Rosemary. When he wanted 

 her, he would find her. If he missed her 

 signal, fluttering from the birch tree in the 

 Spring wind, he could write and say so. 

 Meanwhile she would not seek him, though 

 her heart should break from loneliness and 

 despair. 

 

 Craving the dear touch of him, the sound 

 of his voice, or even the sight of his tall well- 

 knit figure moving along swiftly in the dusk, 

 she compelled herself to accept the situation, 

 bitterness and all. Across her open window 

 struck the single long deepening shadow that 

 precedes daybreak, then grey lights dawned 

 on the far horizon, paling the stars to points 

 of pearl upon dim purple mists. Worn and 

 weary, Rosemary slept until she was called 

 to begin the day s dreary round of toil, as 

 mechanical as the ticking of a clock. 

 

 Cold water removed the traces of tears from 

 her cheeks, but her eyes were red and swollen. 

 The cheap mirror exaggerated her plainness, 

 while memory pitilessly emphasised the beauty 

 of the other woman. As she dressed, the 

 thought came to her that, no matter what 

 happened, she could still go on loving him, 

 that she might always give, whether or not 

 she received anything at all in return. 

 

 "Service," she said to herself, remembering


 

 Hsfting Hot Hnswer 

 

 her dream, "and sacrifice. Giving, not re 

 ceiving ; asking, not answer." If this indeed 

 was love, she had it in fullest measure, so 

 why should she ask for more? 

 

 "Rosemary!" 

 

 " Yes," she called back, trying hard to make 

 her voice even, " I m coming!" 

 

 "It beats all," Grandmother said, fretfully, 

 when she rushed breathlessly into the dining- 

 room. "For the life of me I can t under 

 stand how you can sleep so much." 

 

 Rosemary smiled grimly, but said nothing. 

 

 "Here I ve been settin , waitin for my 

 breakfast, since before six, and it s almost 

 seven now." 

 

 "Never mind," the girl returned, kindly; 

 "I 11 get it ready just as quickly as I can." 

 

 " I was just sayin ," Grandmother con 

 tinued when Aunt Matilda came into the room, 

 "that it beats all how Rosemary can sleep. 

 I ve been up since half-past five and she s 

 just beginnin to get breakfast, and here you 

 come, trailin along in with your hair not 

 combed, at ten minutes to breakfast time. I 

 should think you d be ashamed." 

 

 "My hair is combed," Matilda retorted, 

 quickly on the defensive. 

 

 "I don t know when it was," Grandmother 

 fretted. "I ain t seen it combed since I can 

 remember." 

 

 "Then it s because you ain t looked.


 

 174 

 

 

 tflufff 

 

 Any time you want to see me combin my 

 hair you can come in. I do it every morning." 

 

 Grandmother laughed, sarcastically. " Pears 

 like you thought you was one of them mer 

 maids I was readin about in the paper once. 

 They re half fish and half woman and they 

 set on rocks, combin their hair and singin and 

 the ships go to pieces on the rocks cause the 

 sailors are so anxious to see em they forget 

 where they re goin ." 

 

 "There ain t no rocks outside my door as 

 I know of," Matilda returned, "and only one 

 rocker inside." 

 

 "No, nor your hair ain t like theirs neither. 

 The paper said their hair was golden." 

 

 "Must be nice and stiff," Matilda com 

 mented. " I d hate to have my hair all wire." 

 

 Grandmother lifted her spectacles from the 

 wart and peered through them critically. "I 

 dunno," she said, "as it d look any different, 

 except for the colour. The way you re 

 settin now, against the light, I can see bristles 

 stickin out all over it, same as if t was wire." 

 

 "Fluffy hair is all the style now," said 

 Matilda, complacently. 

 

 " Fluffy !" Grandmother grunted. " If that s 

 what you call it, I reckon it 11 soon go 

 out. It might have been out for fifteen or 

 twenty years and you not know it. I don t 

 believe any self-respectin woman would let 

 her hair go like that. Why n the name of


 

 ashing "Wot Bnswer 175 

 

 common sense can t you take a hair brush and 

 

 wet it in cold water and slick it up, so s folks I " tbcr 8 

 

 IDieap* 

 

 can see that it s combed? Mine s always (pointment 

 slick, and nobody can t say that it is n t." 

 

 "Yes," Matilda agreed with a scornful 

 glance, "it is slick, what there is of it." 

 

 Grandmother s head burned pink through 

 her scanty white locks and her eyes flashed 

 dangerously. Somewhat frightened, Matilda 

 hastened to change the subject. 

 

 "She wears her hair like mine." 

 

 "She?" repeated Grandmother, pricking up 

 her ears, "Who s she?" 

 

 "You know the company up to Marshs ." 

 

 "Who was tellin you? The milkman, or 

 his wife?" 

 

 "None of em," answered Matilda, mys 

 teriously. Then, lowering her voice to a 

 whisper, she added: "I seen her myself!" 

 

 "When?" Grandmother demanded. "You 

 been up there, pay in back your own call?" 

 

 "She went by here yesterday," said Matilda, 

 hurriedly. 

 

 "What was I doin ?" the old lady inquired, 

 resentfully. 

 

 " One time you was asleep and one time you 

 was readin ." 

 

 "What? Do you mean to tell me she went 

 by here twice and you ain t never told me 

 till now?" 

 

 "When you ve been readin ," Matilda


 

 176 

 

 

 f f Bns 

 

 thing s 

 Important 

 

 rejoined, with secret delight, "you ve always 

 told me and Rosemary too that you wan t to 

 be disturbed unless the house took afire. Ain t 

 she, Rosemary?" 

 

 "What?" asked the girl, placing a saucer 

 of stewed prunes at each place and drawing 

 up the three chairs. 

 

 "Ain t she always said she didn t want to 

 be disturbed when she was readin ?" She 

 indicated Grandmother by an inclination of 

 her frowsy head. 

 

 " I don t believe any of us like to be inter 

 rupted when we re reading," Rosemary re 

 plied, tactfully. She disliked to "take sides," 

 and always avoided it whenever possible. 

 

 "There," exclaimed Matilda, triumphantly. 

 

 "And the other time?" pursued Grand 

 mother. Her eyes glittered and her cheeks 

 burned with dull, smouldering fires. 

 

 "You was asleep." 

 

 " I could have been woke up, could n t 

 I?" 

 

 "You could have been," Matilda replied, 

 after a moment s thought, "but when you ve 

 been woke up I ain t never liked to be the one 

 what did it." 

 

 " If it s anything important," Grandmother 

 observed, as she began to eat, " I m willin 

 to be interrupted when I m readin , or to be 

 woke up when I m asleep, and if that woman 

 ever goes by the house again, I want to be


 

 ttot Hnswer 

 

 177 

 

 told of it, and I want you both to understand 

 it, right here and now." 

 

 "What woman?" queried Rosemary. She 

 had been busy in the kitchen and had not 

 grasped the subject of the conversation, 

 though the rumbling of it had reached her 

 from afar. 

 

 "Marshs company," said both voices at 

 once. 

 

 "Oh!" Rosemary steadied herself for a 

 moment against the back of her chair and 

 then sat down. 

 

 "Have you seen her?" asked Grandmother. 

 

 "Yes." Rosemary s answer was scarcely 

 more than a whisper. In her wretchedness, 

 she told the truth, being unable to think suf 

 ficiently to lie. 

 

 "When?" asked Aunt Matilda. 

 

 "Where?" demanded Grandmother. 

 

 "Yesterday, when I was out for a walk." 

 It was not necessary to go back of yesterday. 

 

 "Where was she?" insisted Grandmother. 

 

 "Up on the hill. I didn t know she was 

 there when I went up. She was at the top, 

 resting." 

 

 "Did she speak to you?" asked Aunt 

 Matilda. 

 

 "Yes." Rosemary s voice was very low 

 and had in it all the weariness of the world. 

 

 "What did she say?" inquired Grandmother, 

 with the air of the attorney for the defence. 

 

 t&amp;gt;ax&amp;gt;e J3ou 

 Seen tier 1


 

 178 

 

 

 tdbat 

 E&amp;gt;oes Sbc 

 loot; like? 

 

 The spectacles were resting upon the wart now, 

 and she peered over them disconcertingly. 

 

 "I asked you what she said," Grandmother 

 repeated distinctly, after a pause. 

 

 "She said : How do you do, Miss Starr ? " 

 

 "How d she know who you were?" 

 

 "There, there, Mother," put in Aunt 

 Matilda. " I reckon everybody in these parts 

 knows the Starr family." 

 

 "Of course," returned the old lady, some 

 what mollified. "What else did she say?" 

 

 "Nothing much," stammered Rosemary. 

 "That is, I can t remember. She said it was 

 a nice day, or something of that sort, and then 

 she went back home. She did n t stay but a 

 minute." So much was true, even though that 

 minute had agonised Rosemary beyond words. 

 

 "What does she look like?" Grandmother 

 continued, with deep interest. 

 

 "Not like anybody we know. Aunt Ma 

 tilda can tell you better than I can. She saw 

 her too." 

 

 Accepting modestly this tribute to her 

 powers of observation, Aunt Matilda took the 

 conversation out of Rosemary s hands, greatly 

 to her relief. The remainder of breakfast 

 was a spirited dialogue. Grandmother s doubt 

 on any one point was quickly silenced by the 

 sarcastic comment from Matilda: "Well, 

 bein as you ve seen her and I have n t, of 

 course you know."


 

 "Hot Bnswer 

 

 179 

 

 Meanwhile Rosemary ate, not knowing what 

 she ate, choking down her food with glass 

 after glass of water which by no means as 

 suaged the inner fires. While she was washing 

 the breakfast dishes the other two were dis 

 cussing Mrs. Lee s hair. Grandmother in 

 sisted that it was a wig, as play-actresses 

 always wore them and Mrs. Lee was undoubt 

 edly a play-actress. 

 

 "How do you know?" Matilda inquired, 

 with sarcastic inflection. 

 

 "If she ain t," Grandmother parried, 

 "what s she gallivantin around the country 

 for without her husband?" 

 

 "Maybe he s dead." 

 

 " If he s dead, why ain t she wearin mourn 

 ing, as any decent woman would? She s 

 either a play-actress, or else she s a divorced 

 woman, or maybe both." Either condition, 

 in Grandmother s mind, was the seal of social 

 damnation. 

 

 "If we was on callin terms with the 

 Marshs," said Matilda, meditatively, "Mis 

 Marsh might be bringin her here." 

 

 "Not twice," returned Grandmother, with 

 determination. "This is my house, and I ve 

 got something to say about who comes in it. 

 I would n t even have Mis Marsh now, after 

 she s been hobnobbin with the likes of her." 

 

 After reverting for a moment to the copper- 

 coloured hair, which might or might not be a


 

 i8o 

 

 of tbe lt)fnearfc 

 

 wig, the conversation drifted back to mer 

 maids and the seafaring folk who went astray 

 on the rocks. Aunt Matilda insisted that 

 there were no such things as mermaids, and 

 Grandmother triumphantly dug up the article 

 in question from a copy of The Household 

 Guardian more than three months old. 

 

 "It s a lie, just the same," Matilda pro 

 tested, though weakly, as one in the last ditch. 

 

 "Matilda Starr!" The clarion note of 

 Grandmother s voice would have made the 

 dead stir. "Ain t I showed it to you, in the 

 paper?" To question print was as impious as 

 to doubt Holy Writ. 

 

 Rosemary was greatly relieved when Mrs. 

 Lee gave way to mermaids in the eternal flow 

 of talk. She wondered, sometimes, that their 

 voices did not fail them, though occasionally 

 a sulky silence or a nap produced a brief inter 

 val of peace. She worked faithfully until 

 her household tasks were accomplished, dis 

 covering that, no matter how one s heart 

 aches, one can do the necessary things and 

 do them well. 

 

 Early in the afternoon, she found herself 

 free. Instinct and remorseless pain led her 

 unerringly to the one place, where the great 

 joy had come to her. She searched her suffer 

 ing dumbly, and without mercy. If she knew 

 the reason why ! 

 

 "She s married, and her husband isn t


 

 asking IRot answer 

 

 dead, and they re not divorced." Parrot- 

 like, Rosemary repeated the words to herself, 

 emphasising each fact with a tap of her foot 

 on the ground in front of her. Then a new 

 fear presented itself, clutching coldly at her 

 heart. Perhaps they were going to be divorced 

 and then- 

 Something seemed to snap, like the breaking 

 of a strained tension. Rosemary had come 

 to the point where she could endure no more, 

 and mercifully the pain was eased. Later on, 

 no doubt, she could suffer again, but for the 

 moment she felt only a dull weariness. In 

 the background the ache slumbered, like an 

 ember that is covered with ashes, but now 

 she was at rest. 

 

 She looked about her curiously, as though 

 she were a stranger. Yet, at the very spot 

 where she stood, Mrs. Lee had stood yester 

 day, her brown eyes cold with controlled 

 anger when she made her sarcastic farewell. 

 When she first saw her, she had been sitting 

 on the log, where Alden usually sat. Down 

 in the hollow tree was the wooden box that 

 held the red ribbon. Shyly, the nine silver 

 birches, with bowed heads, had turned down 

 the hillside and stopped. Across, on the other 

 side of the hill, where God hung His flaming 

 tapestries of sunset from the high walls of 

 Heaven, Rosemary had stood that day, 

 weeping, and Love had come to comfort her.


 

 182 flDaster of tbe 

 

 None of it mattered now nothing mattered 

 n&art any more. She had reached the end, what 

 ever the end might be. Seemingly it was a 

 great pause of soul and body, the conscious 

 ness of arrival at the ultimate goal. 

 

 When she saw Alden, she would ask to be 

 released. She could tell him, with some sem 

 blance of truth, that she could not leave 

 Grandmother and Aunt Matilda, because they 

 needed her, and after they had done so much 

 for her, she could not bring herself to seem 

 ungrateful, even for him. The books were 

 full of such things the eternal sacrifice of 

 youth to age, which age unblushingly accepts, 

 perhaps in remembrance of some sacrifice of 

 its own. 

 

 He had told her, long ago, that she was 

 the only woman he knew. Now he had 

 another standard to judge her by and, at the 

 best, she must fall far short of it. Some day 

 Alden would marry he must marry, and have 

 a home of his own when his mother was no 

 longer there to make it for him, and she she 

 was not good enough for him, any more than 

 Cinderella was good enough for the Prince. 

 

 The fact that the Prince had considered 

 Cinder