 He could
 depend upon her for very much, because she loved him; but he was
 afraid of her. "You didn't mean that, I know," she added, smiling.
 
 "Of course I didn't."
 
 "No; your cruelties don't lie in that line; do they, George?"
 
 "I'm sure I never mean to be cruel to you, Lucy."
 
 "I don't think you do. I hardly believe that you ever mean
 anything,--except just to get along and live."
 
 "A fellow must live, you know," said George.
 
 In ordinary society George Hotspur could be bright, and he was proud
 of being bright. With this woman he was always subdued, always made
 to play second fiddle, always talked like a boy; and he knew it. He
 had loved her once, if he was capable of loving anything; but her
 mastery over him wearied him, even though he was, after a fashion,
 proud of her cleverness, and he wished that she were,--well, dead, if
 the reader choose that mode of expressing what probably were George's
 wishes. But he had never told himself that he desired her death. He
 could build pleasant castles in the air as to the murder of Captain
 Stubber, but his thoughts did not travel that way in reference to
 Mrs. Morton.
 
 "She is not pretty, then,--this rich bride of yours?"
 
 "Not particularly; she's well enough, you know."
 
 "And well enough is good enough for you;--is it? Do you love her,
 George?"
 
 The woman's voice was very low and plaintive as she asked the
 question. Though from moment to moment she could use her little skill
 in pricking him with her satire, still she loved him; and she would
 vary her tone, and as at one minute she would make him uneasy by her
 raillery, so at the next she would quell him by her tenderness. She
 looked into his face for a reply, when he hesitated. "Tell me that
 you do not love her," she said, passionately.
 
 "Not particularly," replied George.
 
 "And yet you would marry her?"
 
 "What's a fellow to do? You see how I am fixed about the title. These
 are kinds of things to which a man situated as I am is obliged to
 submit."
 
 "Royal obligations, as one might call them."
 
 "By George, yes," said George, altogether missing the satire. From
 any other lips he would have been sharp enough to catch it. "One
 can't see the whole thing go to the dogs after it has kept its head
 up so long! And then you know, a man can't live altogether without an
 income."
 
 "You have done so, pretty well."
 
 "I know that I owe you a lot of money, Lucy; and I know also that I
 mean to pay you."
 
 "Don't talk about that. I don't know how at such a time as this you
 can bring yourself to mention it." Then she rose from her seat and
 flashed into wrath, carried on by the spirit of her own words. "Look
 here, George; if you send me any of that woman's money, by the living
 God I will send it back to herself. To buy me with her money! But it
 is so like a man."
 
 "I didn't mean that. Sir Harry is to pay all my debts."
 
 "And will not that be the same? Will it not be her money? Why is he
 to pay your debts? Because he loves you?"
 
 "It is all a family arrangement. You don't quite understand."
 
 "Of course I don't understand. Such a one as I cannot lift myself so
 high above the earth. Great families form a sort of heaven of their
 own, which poor broken, ill-conditioned, wretched, common creatures
 such as I am cannot hope to comprehend. But, by heaven, what a lot of
 the vilest clay goes to the making of that garden of Eden! Look here,
 George;--you have nothing of your own?"
 
 "Not much, indeed."
 
 "Nothing. Is not that so? You can answer me at any rate."
 
 "You know all about it," he said,--truly enough, for she did know.
 
 "And you cannot earn a penny."
 
 "I don't know that I can. I never was very good at earning anything."
 
 "It isn't gentlemanlike, is it? But I can earn money."
 
 "By George! yes. I've often envied you. I have indeed."
 
 "How flattering! As far as it went you should have had it
 all,--nearly all,--if you could have been true to me."
 
 "But, Lucy,--about the family?"
 
 "And about your debts? Of course I couldn't pay debts which were
 always increasing. And of course your promises for the future were
 false. We both knew that they were false when they were made. Did
 we not?" She paused for an answer, but he made none. "They meant
 nothing; did they? He is dead now."
 
 "Morton is dead?"
 
 "Yes; he died in San Francisco, months ago."
 
 "I couldn't have known that, Lucy; could I?"
 
 "Don't be a fool! What difference would it have made? Don't pretend
 anything so false. It would be disgusting on the very face of it. It
 mattered nothing to you whether he lived or died. When is it to be?"
 
 "When is what to be?"
 
 "Your marriage with this ill-looking young woman, who has got money,
 but whom you do not even pretend to love."
 
 It struck even George that this was a way in which Emily Hotspur
 should not be described. She had been acknowledged to be the beauty
 of the last season, one of the finest girls that had ever been seen
 about London; and, as for loving her,--he did love her. A man might
 be fond of two dogs, or have two pet horses, and why shouldn't he
 love two women! Of course he loved his cousin. But his circumstances
 at the moment were difficult, and he didn't quite know how to explain
 all this.
 
 "When is it to be?" she said, urging her question imperiously.
 
 In answer to this he gave her to understand that there was still a
 good deal of difficulty. He told her something of his position with
 Captain Stubber, and defined,--not with absolute correctness,--the
 amount of consent which Sir Harry had given to the marriage.
 
 "And what am I to do?" she asked.
 
 He looked blankly into her face. She then rose again, and unlocking a
 desk with a key that hung at her girdle, she took from it a bundle of
 papers.
 
 "There," she said; "there is the letter in which I have your promise
 to marry me when I am free;--as I am now. It could not be less
 injurious to you than when locked up there; but the remembrance of
 it might frighten you." She threw the letter to him across the table,
 but he did not touch it. "And here are others which might be taken to
 mean the same thing. There! I am not so injured as I might seem to
 be,--for I never believed them. How could I believe anything that you
 would say to me,--anything that you would write?"
 
 "Don't be down on me too hard, Lucy."
 
 "No, I will not be down upon you at all. If these things pained you,
 I would not say them. Shall I destroy the letters?" Then she took
 them, one after another, and tore them into small fragments. "You
 will be easier now, I know."
 
 "Easy! I am not very easy, I can tell you."
 
 "Captain Stubber will not let you off so gently as I do. Is that it?"
 
 Then there was made between them a certain pecuniary arrangement,
 which if Mrs. Morton trusted at all the undertaking made to her,
 showed a most wonderful faith on her part. She would lend him £250
 towards the present satisfaction of Captain Stubber; and this sum, to
 be lent for such a purpose, she would consent to receive back again
 out of Sir Harry's money. She must see a certain manager, she said;
 but she did not doubt but that her loan would be forthcoming on the
 Saturday morning. Captain George Hotspur accepted the offer, and was
 profuse in his thanks. After that, when he was going, her weakness
 was almost equal to his vileness.
 
 "You will come and see me," she said, as she held his hand. Again he
 paused a moment. "George, you will come and see me?"
 
 "Oh, of course I will."
 
 "A great deal I can bear; a great deal I have borne; but do not be
 a coward. I knew you before she did, and have loved you better, and
 have treated you better than ever she will do. Of course you will
 come?"
 
 He promised her that he would, and then went from her.
 
 On the Saturday morning Captain Stubber was made temporarily happy by
 the most unexpected receipt of five hundred pounds.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XII.
 
 THE HUNT BECOMES HOT.
 
 
 September passed away with Captain Hotspur very unpleasantly. He had
 various interviews with Captain Stubber, with Mr. Hart, and with
 other creditors, and found very little amusement. Lady Altringham
 had written to him again, advising him strongly to make out a
 complete list of his debts, and to send them boldly to Sir Harry. He
 endeavoured to make out the list, but had hardly the audacity to do
 it even for his own information. When the end of September had come,
 and he was preparing himself to join the party of distinguished
 pheasant-shooters in Norfolk, he had as yet sent no list to
 Sir Harry, nor had he heard a word from Humblethwaite. Certain
 indications had reached him,--continued to reach him from day to
 day,--that Mr. Boltby was at work, but no communication had been made
 actually to himself even by Mr. Boltby. When and how and in what form
 he was expected to send the schedule of his debts to Sir Harry he
 did not know; and thus it came to pass that when the time came for
 his departure from town, he had sent no such schedule at all. His
 sojourn, however, with the distinguished party was to last only for a
 week, and then he would really go to work. He would certainly himself
 write to Sir Harry before the end of October.
 
 In the meantime there came other troubles,--various other troubles.
 One other trouble vexed him sore. There came to him a note from a
 gentleman with whom his acquaintance was familiar though slight,--as
 follows:--
 
 
    DEAR HOTSPUR,--Did I not meet you at the last Goodwood
    meeting? If you don't mind, pray answer me the question.
    You will remember, I do not doubt, that I did; that I lost
    my money too, and paid it.--Yours ever,
 
    F. STACKPOOLE.
 
 
 He understood it all immediately. The Stackpooles had been at
 Humblethwaite. But what business had the man to write letters to him
 with the object of getting him into trouble? He did not answer the
 note, but, nevertheless, it annoyed him much. And then there was
 another great vexation. He was now running low in funds for present
 use. He had made what he feared was a most useless outlay in
 satisfying Stubber's immediate greed for money, and the effect was,
 that at the beginning of the last week in September he found himself
 with hardly more than fifty sovereigns in his possession, which would
 be considerably reduced before he could leave town. He had been worse
 off before,--very much worse; but it was especially incumbent on him
 now to keep up that look of high feather which cannot be maintained
 in its proper brightness without ready cash. He must take a
 man-servant with him among the distinguished guests; he must fee
 gamekeepers, pay railway fares, and have loose cash about him for
 a hundred purposes. He wished it to be known that he was going to
 marry his cousin. He might find some friend with softer heart than
 Altringham, who would lend him a few hundreds on being made to
 believe in this brilliant destiny; but a roll of bank-notes in his
 pocket would greatly aid him in making the destiny credible. Fifty
 pounds, as he well knew, would melt away from him like snow. The
 last fifty pounds of a thousand always goes quicker than any of the
 nineteen other fifties.
 
 Circumstances had made it impossible for him to attend the Leger
 this year, but he had put a little money on it. The result had done
 nothing for or against him,--except this, that whereas he received
 between one and two hundred pounds, he conceived the idea of paying
 only a portion of what he had lost. With reference to the remainder,
 he wrote to ask his friend if it would be quite the same if the money
 were paid at Christmas. If not, of course it should be sent at once.
 The friend was one of the Altringham set, who had been at Castle
 Corry, and who had heard of George's hopes in reference to his
 cousin. George added a postscript to his letter: "This kind of thing
 will be over for me very soon. I am to be a Benedict, and the house
 of Humblethwaite and the title are to be kept together. I know you
 will congratulate me. My cousin is a charming girl, and worth all
 that I shall lose ten times over." It was impossible, he thought,
 that the man should refuse him credit for eighty pounds till
 Christmas, when the man should know that he was engaged to be married
 to £20,000 a year! But the man did refuse. The man wrote back to say
 that he did not understand this kind of thing at all, and that he
 wanted his money at once. George Hotspur sent the man his money, not
 without many curses on the illiberality of such a curmudgeon. Was it
 not cruel that a fellow would not give him so trifling an assistance
 when he wanted it so badly? All the world seemed to conspire to hurt
 him just at this most critical moment of his life! In many of his
 hardest emergencies for ready money he had gone to Mrs. Morton. But
 even he felt that just at present he could not ask her for more.
 
 Nevertheless, a certain amount of cash was made to be forthcoming
 before he took his departure for Norfolk. In the course of the
 preceding spring he had met a young gentleman in Mr. Hart's small
 front parlour, who was there upon ordinary business. He was a young
 gentleman with good prospects, and with some command of ready money;
 but he liked to live, and would sometimes want Mr. Hart's assistance.
 His name was Walker, and though he was not exactly one of that class
 in which it delighted Captain Hotspur to move, nevertheless he was
 not altogether disdained by that well-born and well-bred gentleman.
 On the third of October, the day before he left London to join his
 distinguished friends in Norfolk, George Hotspur changed a cheque
 for nearly three hundred pounds at Mr. Walker's banker's. Poor Mr.
 Walker! But Cousin George went down to Norfolk altogether in high
 feather. If there were play, he would play. He would bet about
 pulling straws if he could find an adversary to bet with him. He
 could chink sovereigns about at his ease, at any rate, during the
 week. Cousin George liked to chink sovereigns about at his ease. And
 this point of greatness must be conceded to him,--that, however black
 might loom the clouds of the coming sky, he could enjoy the sunshine
 of the hour.
 
 In the meantime Mr. Boltby was at work, and before Cousin George had
 shot his last pheasant in such very good company, Sir Harry was up
 in town assisting Mr. Boltby. How things had gone at Humblethwaite
 between Sir Harry and his daughter must not be told on this page;
 but the reader may understand that nothing had as yet occurred to
 lessen Sir Harry's objection to the match. There had been some
 correspondence between Sir Harry and Mr. Boltby, and Sir Harry had
 come up to town. When the reader learns that on the very day on
 which Cousin George and his servant were returning to London by the
 express train from Norfolk, smoking many cigars and drinking many
 glasses,--George of sherry, and the servant probably of beer and
 spirits alternately,--each making himself happy with a novel;
 George's novel being French, and that of the servant English
 sensational,--the reader, when he learns that on this very day Sir
 Harry had interviews with Captain Stubber and also with Mrs. Morton,
 will be disposed to think that things were not going very well for
 Cousin George. But then the reader does not as yet know the nature of
 the persistency of Emily Hotspur.
 
 What Sir Harry did with Captain Stubber need not be minutely
 described. There can be no doubt that Cousin George was not spared by
 the Captain, and that when he understood what might be the result of
 telling the truth, he told all that he knew. In that matter of the
 £500 Cousin George had really been ill-treated. The payment had done
 him no sort of service whatever. Of Captain Stubber's interview with
 Sir Harry nothing further need now be said. But it must be explained
 that Sir Harry, led astray by defective information, made a mistake
 in regard to Mrs. Morton, and found out his mistake. He did not much
 like Mrs. Morton, but he did not leave her without an ample apology.
 From Mrs. Morton he learned nothing whatever in regard to Cousin
 George,--nothing but this, that Mrs. Morton did not deny that she
 was acquainted with Captain Hotspur. Mr. Boltby had learned, however,
 that Cousin George had drawn the money for a cheque payable to her
 order, and he had made himself nearly certain of the very nature of
 the transaction.
 
 Early on the morning after George's return he was run to ground by
 Mr. Boltby's confidential clerk, at the hotel behind the club. It
 was so early, to George at least, that he was still in bed. But the
 clerk, who had breakfasted at eight, been at his office by nine, and
 had worked hard for two hours and a half since, did not think it at
 all early. George, who knew that his pheasant-shooting pleasure was
 past, and that immediate trouble was in store for him, had consoled
 himself over-night with a good deal of curaçoa and seltzer and
 brandy, and had taken these comforting potations after a bottle of
 champagne. He was, consequently, rather out of sorts when he was run
 to ground in his very bedroom by Boltby's clerk. He was cantankerous
 at first, and told the clerk to go and be d----d. The clerk pleaded
 Sir Harry. Sir Harry was in town, and wanted to see his cousin. A
 meeting must, of course, be arranged. Sir Harry wished that it might
 be in Mr. Boltby's private room. When Cousin George objected that he
 did not choose to have any interview with Sir Harry in presence of
 the lawyer, the clerk very humbly explained that the private room
 would be exclusively for the service of the two gentlemen. Sick as he
 was, Cousin George knew that nothing was to be gained by quarrelling
 with Sir Harry. Though Sir Harry should ask for an interview in
 presence of the Lord Mayor, he must go to it. He made the hour as
 late as he could, and at last three o'clock was settled.
 
 At one, Cousin George was at work upon his broiled bones and tea
 laced with brandy, having begun his meal with soda and brandy. He was
 altogether dissatisfied with himself. Had he known on the preceding
 evening what was coming, he would have dined on a mutton chop and a
 pint of sherry, and have gone to bed at ten o'clock. He looked at
 himself in the glass, and saw that he was bloated and red,--and a
 thing foul to behold. It was a matter of boast to him,--the most
 pernicious boast that ever a man made,--that in twenty-four hours
 he could rid himself of all outward and inward sign of any special
 dissipation; but the twenty-four hours were needed, and now not
 twelve were allowed him. Nevertheless, he kept his appointment. He
 tried to invent some lie which he might send by a commissioner, and
 which might not ruin him. But he thought upon the whole that it would
 be safer for him to go.
 
 When he entered the room he saw at a glance that there was to be
 war,--war to the knife,--between him and Sir Harry. He perceived at
 once that if it were worth his while to go on with the thing at all,
 he must do so in sole dependence on the spirit and love of Emily
 Hotspur. Sir Harry at their first greeting declined to shake hands
 with him, and called him Captain Hotspur.
 
 "Captain Hotspur," he said, "in a word, understand that there must be
 no further question of a marriage between you and my daughter."
 
 "Why not, Sir Harry?"
 
 "Because, sir--" and then he paused--"I would sooner see my girl dead
 at my feet than entrust her to such a one as you. It was true what
 you said to me at Humblethwaite. There would have been something
 very alluring to me in the idea of joining the property and the
 title together. A man will pay much for such a whim. I would not
 unwillingly have paid very much in money; but I am not so infamously
 wicked as to sacrifice my daughter utterly by giving her to one so
 utterly unworthy of her as you are."
 
 "I told you that I was in debt, Sir Harry."
 
 "I wanted no telling as to that; but I did want telling as to your
 mode of life, and I have had it now. You had better not press me. You
 had better see Mr. Boltby. He will tell you what I am willing to do
 for you upon receiving your written assurance that you will never
 renew your offer of marriage to Miss Hotspur."
 
 "I cannot do that," said Cousin George, hoarsely.
 
 "Then I shall leave you with your creditors to deal with as they
 please. I have nothing further to suggest myself, and I would
 recommend that you should see Mr. Boltby before you leave the
 chambers."
 
 "What does my cousin say?" he asked.
 
 "Were you at Goodwood last meeting?" asked Sir Harry. "But of course
 you were."
 
 "I was," he answered. He was obliged to acknowledge so much, not
 quite knowing what Stackpoole might have said or done. "But I can
 explain that."
 
 "There is no need whatever of any explanation. Do you generally
 borrow money from such ladies as Mrs. Morton?" Cousin George blushed
 when this question was asked, but made no answer to it. It was one
 that he could not answer. "But it makes no difference, Captain
 Hotspur. I mention these things only to let you feel that I know you.
 I must decline any further speech with you. I strongly advise you to
 see Mr. Boltby at once. Good afternoon."
 
 So saying, the Baronet withdrew quickly, and Cousin George heard him
 shut the door of the chambers.
 
 After considering the matter for a quarter of an hour, Cousin George
 made up his mind that he would see the lawyer. No harm could come
 to him from seeing the lawyer. He was closeted with Mr. Boltby for
 nearly an hour, and before he left the chamber had been forced to
 confess to things of which he had not thought it possible that Mr.
 Boltby should ever have heard. Mr. Boltby knew the whole story of
 the money raised on the commission, of the liabilities to both Hart
 and Stubber, and had acquainted himself with the history of Lord
 Baldebeque's cheque. Mr. Boltby was not indignant, as had been Sir
 Harry, but intimated it as a thing beyond dispute that a man who had
 done such things as could be proved against Cousin George,--and as
 would undoubtedly be proved against him if he would not give up his
 pursuit of the heiress,--must be disposed of with severity, unless
 he retreated at once of his own accord. Mr. Boltby did indeed hint
 something about a criminal prosecution, and utter ruin,
 and--incarceration.
 
 But if George Hotspur would renounce his cousin utterly,--putting
 his renunciation on paper,--Sir Harry would pay all his debts to the
 extent of twenty thousand pounds, would allow him four hundred a year
 on condition that he would live out of England, and would leave him a
 further sum of twenty thousand pounds by his will, on condition that
 no renewed cause of offence were given.
 
 "You had better, perhaps, go home and think about it, Mr. Hotspur,"
 said the lawyer. Cousin George did go away and think about it.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XIII.
 
 "I WILL NOT DESERT HIM."
 
 
 Sir Harry, before he had left Humblethwaite for London in October,
 had heard enough of his cousin's sins to make him sure that the
 match must be opposed with all his authority. Indeed he had so felt
 from the first moment in which George had begun to tell him of
 what had occurred at Airey Force. He had never thought that George
 Hotspur would make a fitting husband for his daughter. But, without
 so thinking, he had allowed his mind to dwell upon the outside
 advantages of the connection, dreaming of a fitness which he knew did
 not exist, till he had vacillated, and the evil thing had come upon
 him. When the danger was so close upon him to make him see what it
 was, to force him to feel what would be the misery threatened to his
 daughter, to teach him to realize his own duty, he condemned himself
 bitterly for his own weakness. Could any duty which he owed to the
 world be so high or so holy as that which was due from him to his
 child? He almost hated his name and title and position as he thought
 of the evil that he had already done. Had his cousin George been in
 no close succession to the title, would he have admitted a man of
 whom he knew so much ill, and of whom he had never heard any good,
 within his park palings? And then he could not but acknowledge to
 himself that by asking such a one to his house,--a man such as this
 young cousin who was known to be the heir to the title,--he had given
 his daughter special reason to suppose that she might regard him as
 a fitting suitor for her hand. She of course had known,--had felt as
 keenly as he had felt, for was she not a Hotspur?--that she would be
 true to her family by combining her property and the title, and that
 by yielding to such a marriage she would be doing a family duty,
 unless there were reasons against it stronger than those connected
 with his name. But as to those other reasons, must not her father and
 her mother know better than she could know? When she found that the
 man was made welcome both in town and country, was it not natural
 that she should suppose that there were no stronger reasons? All this
 Sir Harry felt, and blamed himself and determined that though he must
 oppose his daughter and make her understand that the hope of such a
 marriage must be absolutely abandoned, it would be his duty to be
 very tender with her. He had sinned against her already, in that he
 had vacillated and had allowed that handsome but vile and worthless
 cousin to come near her.
 
 In his conduct to his daughter, Sir Harry endeavoured to be just,
 and tender, and affectionate; but in his conduct to his wife on
 the occasion he allowed himself some scope for the ill-humour not
 unnaturally incident to his misfortune. "Why on earth you should
 have had him in Bruton Street when you knew very well what he was, I
 cannot conceive," said Sir Harry.
 
 "But I didn't know," said Lady Elizabeth, fearing to remind her
 husband that he also had sanctioned the coming of the cousin.
 
 "I had told you. It was there that the evil was done. And then to let
 them go to that picnic together!"
 
 "What could I do when Mrs. Fitzpatrick asked to be taken? You
 wouldn't have had me tell Emily that she should not be one of the
 party."
 
 "I would have put it off till he was out of the house."
 
 "But the Fitzpatricks were going too," pleaded the poor woman.
 
 "It wouldn't have happened at all if you had not asked him to stay
 till the Monday," said Sir Harry; and to this charge Lady Elizabeth
 knew that there was no answer. There she had clearly disobeyed her
 husband; and though she doubtless suffered much from some dim idea of
 injustice, she was aware that as she had so offended she must submit
 to be told that all this evil had come from her wrong-doing.
 
 "I hope she will not be obstinate," said Sir Harry to his wife.
 Lady Elizabeth, though she was not an acute judge of character, did
 know her own daughter, and was afraid to say that Emily would not
 be obstinate. She had the strongest possible respect as well as
 affection for her own child; she thoroughly believed in Emily--much
 more thoroughly than she did in herself. But she could not say that
 in such a matter Emily would not be obstinate. Lady Elizabeth was
 very intimately connected with two obstinate persons, one of whom was
 young and the other old; and she thought that perhaps the younger was
 the more obstinate of the two.
 
 "It is quite out of the question that she should marry him," said Sir
 Harry, sadly. Still Lady Elizabeth made no reply. "I do not think
 that she will disobey me," continued Sir Harry. Still Lady Elizabeth
 said nothing. "If she gives me a promise, she will keep it," said Sir
 Harry.
 
 Then the mother could answer, "I am sure she will."
 
 "If the worst come to the worst, we must go away."
 
 "To Scarrowby?" suggested Lady Elizabeth, who hated Scarrowby.
 
 "That would do no good. Scarrowby would be the same as Humblethwaite
 to her, or perhaps worse. I mean abroad. We must shut up the place
 for a couple of years, and take her to Naples and Vienna, or perhaps
 to Egypt. Everything must be changed to her!--that is, if the evil
 has gone deep enough."
 
 "Is he so very bad?" asked Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "He is a liar and a blackguard, and I believe him to be a swindler,"
 said Sir Harry. Then Lady Elizabeth was mute, and her husband left
 her.
 
 At this time he had heard the whole story of the pawning of the
 commission, had been told something of money raised by worthless
 cheques, and had run to ground that lie about the Goodwood races. But
 he had not yet heard anything special of Mrs. Morton. The only attack
 on George's character which had as yet been made in the hearing of
 Emily had been with reference to the Goodwood races. Mrs. Stackpoole
 was a lady of some determination, and one who in society liked to
 show that she was right in her assertions, and well informed on
 matters in dispute; and she hated Cousin George. There had therefore
 come to be a good deal said about the Goodwood meeting, so that the
 affair reached Sir Harry's ears. He perceived that Cousin George
 had lied, and determined that Emily should be made to know that her
 cousin had lied. But it was very difficult to persuade her of this.
 That everybody else should tell stories about George and the Goodwood
 meeting seemed to her to be natural enough; she contented herself
 with thinking all manner of evil of Mr. and Mrs. Stackpoole, and
 reiterating her conviction that George Hotspur had not been at the
 meeting in question.
 
 "I don't know that it much signifies," Mrs. Stackpoole had said in
 anger.
 
 "Not in the least," Emily had replied, "only that I happen to know
 that my cousin was not there. He goes to so many race meetings that
 there has been some little mistake."
 
 Then Mr. Stackpoole had written to Cousin George, and Cousin George
 had thought it wise to make no reply. Sir Harry, however, from other
 sources had convinced himself of the truth, and had told his daughter
 that there was evidence enough to prove the fact in any court of law.
 Emily when so informed had simply held her tongue, and had resolved
 to hate Mrs. Stackpoole worse than ever.
 
 She had been told from the first that her engagement with her cousin
 would not receive her father's sanction; and for some days after
 that there had been silence on the subject at Humblethwaite, while
 the correspondence with Mr. Boltby was being continued. Then there
 came the moment in which Sir Harry felt that he must call upon his
 daughter to promise obedience, and the conversation which has been
 described between him and Lady Elizabeth was preparatory to his doing
 so.
 
 "My dear," he said to his daughter, "sit down; I want to speak to
 you."
 
 He had sent for her into his own morning room, in which she did not
 remember to have been asked to sit down before. She would often
 visit him there, coming in and out on all manner of small occasions,
 suggesting that he should ride with her, asking for the loan of a
 gardener for a week for some project of her own, telling him of a big
 gooseberry, interrupting him ruthlessly on any trifle in the world.
 But on such occasions she would stand close to him, leaning on him.
 And he would scold her,--playfully, or kiss her, or bid her begone
 from the room,--but would always grant what she asked of him. To him,
 though he hardly knew that it was so, such visits from his darling
 had been the bright moments of his life. But up to this morning he
 had never bade her be seated in that room.
 
 "Emily," he said, "I hope you understand that all this about your
 cousin George must be given up." She made no reply, though he waited
 perhaps for a minute. "It is altogether out of the question. I am
 very, very sorry that you have been subjected to such a sorrow. I
 will own that I have been to blame for letting him come to my house."
 
 "No, Papa, no."
 
 "Yes, my dear, I have been to blame, and I feel it keenly. I did not
 then know as much of him as I do now, but I had heard that which
 should have made me careful to keep him out of your company."
 
 "Hearing about people, Papa! Is that fair? Are we not always hearing
 tales about everybody?"
 
 "My dear child, you must take my word for something."
 
 "I will take it for everything in all the world, Papa."
 
 "He has been a thoroughly bad young man."
 
 "But, Papa--"
 
 "You must take my word for it when I tell you that I have positive
 proof of what I am telling you."
 
 "But, Papa--"
 
 "Is not that enough?"
 
 "No, Papa. I am heartily sorry that he should have been what you call
 a bad young man. I wish young men weren't so bad;--that there were no
 racecourses, and betting, and all that. But if he had been my brother
 instead of my cousin--"
 
 "Don't talk about your brother, Emily."
 
 "Should we hate him because he has been unsteady? Should we not do
 all that we could in the world to bring him back? I do not know that
 we are to hate people because they do what they ought not to do."
 
 "We hate liars."
 
 "He is not a liar. I will not believe it."
 
 "Why did he tell you that he was not at those races, when he was
 there as surely as you are here? But, my dear, I will not argue about
 all this with you. It is not right that I should do so. It is my duty
 to inquire into these things, and yours to believe me and to obey
 me." Then he paused, but his daughter made no reply to him. He looked
 into her face, and saw there that mark about her eyes which he knew
 he so often showed himself; which he so well remembered with his
 father. "I suppose you do believe me, Emily, when I tell you that he
 is worthless."
 
 "He need not be worthless always."
 
 "His conduct has been such that he is unfit to be trusted with
 anything."
 
 "He must be the head of our family some day, Papa."
 
 "That is our misfortune, my dear. No one can feel it as I do. But I
 need not add to it the much greater misfortune of sacrificing to him
 my only child."
 
 "If he was so bad, why did he come here?"
 
 "That is true. I did not expect to be rebuked by you, Emily, but I am
 open to that rebuke."
 
 "Dear, dear Papa, indeed I did not mean to rebuke you. But I cannot
 give him up."
 
 "You must give him up."
 
 "No, Papa. If I did, I should be false. I will not be false. You say
 that he is false. I do not know that, but I will not be false. Let me
 speak to you for one minute."
 
 "It is of no use."
 
 "But you will hear me, Papa. You always hear me when I speak to
 you." She had left her chair now, and was standing close to him, not
 leaning upon him as was her wont in their pleasantest moments of
 fellowship, but ready to do so whenever she should find that his mood
 would permit it. "I will never marry him without your leave."
 
 "Thanks, Emily; I know how sacred is a promise from you."
 
 "But mine to him is equally sacred. I shall still be engaged to him.
 I told him how it would be. I said that, as long as you or Mamma
 lived, I would never marry without your leave. Nor would I see him,
 or write to him without your knowledge. I told him so. But I told him
 also that I would always be true to him. I mean to keep my word."
 
 "If you find him to be utterly worthless, you cannot be bound by such
 a promise."
 
 "I hope it may not be so. I do not believe that it is so. I know him
 too well to think that he can be utterly worthless. But if he was,
 who should try to save him from worthlessness if not his nearest
 relatives? We try to reclaim the worst criminals, and sometimes we
 succeed. And he must be the head of the family. Remember that. Ought
 we not to try to reclaim him? He cannot be worse than the prodigal
 son."
 
 "He is ten times worse. I cannot tell you what has been his life."
 
 "Papa, I have often thought that in our rank of life society is
 responsible for the kind of things which young men do. If he was at
 Goodwood, which I do not believe, so was Mr. Stackpoole. If he was
 betting, so was Mr. Stackpoole."
 
 "But Mr. Stackpoole did not lie."
 
 "I don't know that," she said, with a little toss of her head.
 
 "Emily, you have no business either to say or to think it."
 
 "I care nothing for Mr. Stackpoole whether he tells truth or not. He
 and his wife have made themselves very disagreeable,--that is all.
 But as for George, he is what he is, because other young men are
 allowed to be the same."
 
 "You do not know the half of it."
 
 "I know as much as I want to know, Papa. Let one keep as clear of it
 as one can, it is impossible not to hear how young men live. And yet
 they are allowed to go everywhere, and are flattered and encouraged.
 I do not pretend that George is better than others. I wish he were.
 Oh, how I wish it! But such as he is he belongs in a way to us, and
 we ought not to desert him. He belongs, I know, to me, and I will not
 desert him."
 
 Sir Harry felt that there was no arguing with such a girl as this.
 Some time since he had told her that it was unfit that he should be
 brought into an argument with his own child, and there was nothing
 now for him but to fall back upon the security which that assertion
 gave him. He could not charge her with direct disobedience, because
 she had promised him that she would not do any of those things
 which, as a father, he had a right to forbid. He relied fully on her
 promise, and so far might feel himself to be safe. Nevertheless he
 was very unhappy. Of what service would his child be to him or he
 to her, if he were doomed to see her pining from day to day with an
 unpermitted love? It was the dearest wish of his heart to make her
 happy, as it was his fondest ambition to see her so placed in the
 world that she might be the happy transmitter of all the honours
 of the house of Humblethwaite,--if she could not transmit all the
 honours of the name. Time might help him. And then if she could be
 made really to see how base was the clay of which had been made this
 image which she believed to be of gold, might it not be that at last
 she would hate a thing that was so vile? In order that she might do
 so, he would persist in finding out what had been the circumstances
 of this young man's life. If, as he believed, the things which George
 Hotspur had done were such as in another rank of life would send the
 perpetrator to the treadmill, surely then she would not cling to her
 lover. It would not be in her nature to prefer that which was foul
 and abominable and despised of all men. It was after this, when he
 had seen Mr. Boltby, that the idea occurred to him of buying up
 Cousin George, so that Cousin George should himself abandon his
 engagement.
 
 "You had better go now, my dear," he said, after his last speech. "I
 fully rely upon the promise you have made me. I know that I can rely
 upon it. And you also may rely upon me. I give you my word as your
 father that this man is unfit to be your husband, and that I should
 commit a sin greater than I can describe to you were I to give my
 sanction to such a marriage."
 
 Emily made no answer to this, but left the room without having once
 leaned upon her father's shoulder.
 
 That look of hers troubled him sadly when he was alone. What was to
 be the meaning of it, and what the result? She had given him almost
 unasked the only promise which duty required her to give, but at the
 same time she had assured him by her countenance, as well as by her
 words, that she would be as faithful to her lover as she was prepared
 to be obedient to her father. And then if there should come a long
 contest of that nature, and if he should see her devoted year after
 year to a love which she would not even try to cast off from her, how
 would he be able to bear it? He, too, was firm, but he knew himself
 to be as tender-hearted as he was obstinate. It would be more than
 he could bear. All the world would be nothing for him then. And if
 there were ever to be a question of yielding, it would be easier
 to do something towards lessening the vileness of the man now than
 hereafter. He, too, had some of that knowledge of the world which had
 taught Lady Altringham to say that the young people in such contests
 could always beat the old people. Thinking of this, and of that look
 upon his child's brows, he almost vacillated again. Any amount of
 dissipation he could now have forgiven; but to be a liar, too, and a
 swindler! Before he went to bed that night he had made up his mind to
 go to London and to see Mr. Boltby.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XIV.
 
 PERTINACITY.
 
 
 On the day but one after the scene narrated in the last chapter
 Sir Harry went to London, and Lady Elizabeth and Emily were left
 alone together in the great house at Humblethwaite. Emily loved her
 mother dearly. The proper relations of life were reversed between
 them, and the younger domineered over the elder. But the love
 which the daughter felt was probably the stronger on this account.
 Lady Elizabeth never scolded, never snubbed, never made herself
 disagreeable, was never cross; and Emily, with her strong perceptions
 and keen intelligence, knew all her mother's excellence, and loved
 it the better because of her mother's weakness. She preferred her
 father's company, but no one could say she neglected her mother for
 the sake of her father.
 
 Hitherto she had said very little to Lady Elizabeth as to her lover.
 She had, in the first place, told her mother, and then had received
 from her mother, second-hand, her father's disapproval. At that time
 she had only said that it was "too late." Poor Lady Elizabeth had
 been able to make no useful answer to this. It certainly was too
 late. The evil should have been avoided by refusing admittance to
 Cousin George both in London and at Humblethwaite. It certainly was
 too late;--too late, that is, to avoid the evil altogether. The girl
 had been asked for her heart, and had given it. It was very much too
 late. But evils such as that do admit of remedy. It is not every girl
 that can marry the man whom she first confesses that she loves. Lady
 Elizabeth had some idea that her child, being nobler born and of more
 importance than other people's children, ought to have been allowed
 by fate to do so,--as there certainly is a something withdrawn from
 the delicate aroma of a first-class young woman by any transfer of
 affections;--but if it might not be so, even an Emily Hotspur must
 submit to a lot not uncommon among young women in general, and
 wait and wish till she could acknowledge to herself that her heart
 was susceptible of another wound.