 On receiving that message, both his
 wife and daughter went to him; but as yet he could tell them nothing.
 Tidings had come which would make it necessary that he should go at
 once to London. As soon as breakfast should be over he would see
 George Hotspur. They both knew from the tone in which the name was
 pronounced that the "tidings" were of their nature bad, and that they
 had reference to the sins of their guest.
 
 "You had better read that letter," he said as soon as George was in
 the room. As he spoke his face was towards the fire, and in that
 position he remained. The letter had been in his hand, and he only
 half turned round to give it. George read the letter slowly, and when
 he had got through it, only half understanding the words, but still
 knowing well the charge which it contained, stood silent, utterly
 conquered. "I suppose it is true?" said Sir Harry, in a low voice,
 facing his enemy.
 
 "I did win some money," said Cousin George.
 
 "And you cheated?"
 
 "Oh dear no;--nothing of the sort."
 
 But his confession was written in his face, and was heard in his
 voice, and peeped out through every motion of his limbs. He was a
 cur, and denied the accusation in a currish manner, hardly intended
 to create belief.
 
 "He must be paid back his money," said Sir Harry.
 
 "I had promised that," said Cousin George.
 
 "Has it been your practice, sir, when gambling, to pay back money
 that you have won? You are a scoundrel,--a heartless scoundrel,--to
 try and make your way into my house when I had made such liberal
 offers to buy your absence." To this Cousin George made no sort of
 answer. The game was up. And had he not already told himself that
 it was a game that he should never have attempted to play? "We will
 leave this house if you please, both of us, at eleven. We will go to
 town together. The carriage will be ready at eleven. You had better
 see to the packing of your things, with the servant."
 
 "Shall I not say a word of adieu to Lady Elizabeth?"
 
 "No, sir! You shall never speak to a female in my house again."
 
 The two were driven over to Penrith together, and went up to London
 in the same carriage, Sir Harry paying for all expenses without a
 word. Sir Harry before he left his house saw his wife for a moment,
 but he did not see his daughter. "Tell her," said he, "that it must
 be,--must be all over." The decision was told to Emily, but she
 simply refused to accept it. "It shall not be so," said she, flashing
 out. Lady Elizabeth endeavoured to show her that her father had done
 all he could to further her views--had been ready to sacrifice to her
 all his own wishes and convictions.
 
 "Why is he so changed? He has heard of some new debt. Of course there
 are debts. We did not suppose that it could be done all at once, and
 so easily." She refused to be comforted, and refused to believe.
 She sat alone weeping in her own room, and swore, when her mother
 came to her, that no consideration, no tidings as to George's past
 misconduct, should induce her to break her faith to the man to whom
 her word had been given;--"my word, and Papa's, and yours," said
 Emily, pleading her cause with majesty through her tears.
 
 On the day but one following there came a letter from Sir Harry to
 Lady Elizabeth, very short, but telling her the whole truth. "He has
 cheated like a common low swindler as he is, with studied tricks at
 cards, robbing a poor man, altogether beneath him in station, of
 hundreds of pounds. There is no doubt about it. It is uncertain even
 yet whether he will not be tried before a jury. He hardly even denies
 it. A creature viler, more cowardly, worse, the mind of man cannot
 conceive. My broken-hearted, dearest, best darling must be told
 all this. Tell her that I know what she will suffer. Tell her that
 I shall be as crushed by it as she. But anything is better than
 degradation such as this. Tell her specially that I have not decided
 without absolute knowledge." Emily was told. The letter was read to
 her and by her till she knew it almost by heart. There came upon
 her a wan look of abject agony, that seemed to rob her at once of
 her youth and beauty; but even now she would not yield. She did
 not longer affect to disbelieve the tidings, but said that no man,
 let him do what he might, could be too far gone for repentance and
 forgiveness. She would wait. She had talked of waiting two years. She
 would be content to wait ten. What though he had cheated at cards!
 Had she not once told her mother that should it turn out that he had
 been a murderer, then she would become a murderer's wife? She did not
 know that cheating at cards was worse than betting at horse-races. It
 was all bad,--very bad. It was the kind of life into which men were
 led by the fault of those who should have taught them better. No;
 she would not marry him without her father's leave: but she would
 never own that her engagement was broken, let them affix what most
 opprobrious name to him they might choose. To her card-sharpers
 seemed to be no worse than gamblers. She was quite sure that Christ
 had come to save men who cheat at cards as well as others.
 
 As Sir Harry and his cousin entered the London station late at
 night,--it was past midnight,--Sir Harry bade his companion meet him
 the next morning at Mr. Boltby's chambers at eleven. Cousin George
 had had ample time for meditation, and had considered that it might
 be best for him to "cut up a little rough."
 
 "Mr. Boltby is my enemy," he said, "and I don't know what I am to get
 by going there."
 
 "If you don't, sir, I'll not pay one shilling for you."
 
 "I have your promise, Sir Harry."
 
 "If you are not there at the time I fix, I will pay nothing, and the
 name may go to the dogs."
 
 Then they both went to the station hotel,--not together, but the
 younger following the elder's feet,--and slept for the last time in
 their lives under one roof.
 
 Cousin George did not show himself at Mr. Boltby's, being still in
 his bed at the station hotel at the time named; but at three o'clock
 he was with Mrs. Morton.
 
 For the present we will go back to Sir Harry. He was at the lawyer's
 chambers at the time named, and Mr. Boltby smiled when told of the
 summons which had been given to Cousin George. By this time Sir Harry
 had acknowledged his gratitude to Mr. Boltby over and over again, and
 Mr. Boltby perhaps, having no daughter, thought that the evil had
 been cured. He was almost inclined to be jocular, and did laugh at
 Sir Harry in a mild way when told of the threat.
 
 "We must pay his debts, Sir Harry, I think."
 
 "I don't see it at all. I would rather face everything. And I told
 him that I would pay nothing."
 
 "Ah, but you had told him that you would. And then those cormorants
 have been told so also. We had better build a bridge of gold for
 a falling enemy. Stick to your former proposition, without any
 reference to a legacy, and make him write the letter. My clerk shall
 find him to-morrow."
 
 Sir Harry at last gave way; the lucky Walker received back his full
 money, Bullbean's wages of iniquity and all; and Sir Harry returned
 to Humblethwaite.
 
 Cousin George was sitting in Mrs. Morton's room with a very bad
 headache five days after his arrival in London, and she was reading
 over a manuscript which she had just written. "That will do, I
 think," she said.
 
 "Just the thing," said he, without raising his head.
 
 "Will you copy it now, George?"
 
 "Not just now, I am so seedy. I'll take it and do it at the club."
 
 "No; I will not have that. The draft would certainly be left out on
 the club table; and you would go to billiards, and the letter never
 would be written."
 
 "I'll come back and do it after dinner."
 
 "I shall be at the theatre then, and I won't have you here in my
 absence. Rouse yourself and do it now. Don't be such a poor thing."
 
 "That's all very well, Lucy; but if you had a sick headache, you
 wouldn't like to have to write a d----d letter like that."
 
 Then she rose up to scold him, being determined that the letter
 should be written then and there. "Why, what a coward you are; what a
 feckless, useless creature! Do you think that I have never to go for
 hours on the stage, with the gas in a blaze around me, and my head
 ready to split? And what is this? A paper to write that will take you
 ten minutes. The truth is, you don't like to give up the girl!" Could
 she believe it of him after knowing him so well; could she think that
 there was so much of good in him?
 
 "You say that to annoy me. You know that I never cared for her."
 
 "You would marry her now if they would let you."
 
 "No, by George. I've had enough of that. You're wide awake enough to
 understand, Lucy, that a fellow situated as I am, over head and ears
 in debt, and heir to an old title, should struggle to keep the things
 together. Families and names don't matter much, I suppose; but, after
 all, one does care for them. But I've had enough of that. As for
 Cousin Emily, you know, Lucy, I never loved any woman but you in my
 life."
 
 He was a brute, unredeemed by any one manly gift; idle,
 self-indulgent, false, and without a principle. She was a woman
 greatly gifted, with many virtues, capable of self-sacrifice,
 industrious, affectionate, and loving truth if not always true
 herself. And yet such a word as that from this brute sufficed to
 please her for the moment. She got up and kissed his forehead and
 dropped for him some strong spirit in a glass, which she mixed with
 water, and cooled his brow with eau-de-cologne. "Try to write it,
 dearest. It should be written at once if it is to be written." Then
 he turned himself wearily to her writing-desk, and copied the words
 which she had prepared for him.
 
 The letter was addressed to Mr. Boltby, and purported to be
 a renunciation of all claim to Miss Hotspur's hand, on the
 understanding that his debts were paid for him to the extent of
 £25,000, and that an allowance were made to him of £500 a year,
 settled on him as an annuity for life, as long as he should live out
 of England. Mr. Boltby had given him to understand that this clause
 would not be exacted, unless circumstances should arise which should
 make Sir Harry think it imperative upon him to demand its execution.
 The discretion must be left absolute with Sir Harry; but, as Mr.
 Boltby said, Captain Hotspur could trust Sir Harry's word and his
 honour.
 
 "If I'm to be made to go abroad, what the devil are you to do?" he
 had said to Mrs. Morton.
 
 "There need be no circumstances," said Mrs. Morton, "to make it
 necessary."
 
 Of course Captain Hotspur accepted the terms on her advice. He had
 obeyed Lady Altringham, and had tried to obey Emily, and would now
 obey Mrs. Morton, because Mrs. Morton was the nearest to him.
 
 The letter which he copied was a well-written letter, put together
 with much taste, so that the ignoble compact to which it gave assent
 should seem to be as little ignoble as might be possible. "I entered
 into the arrangement," the letter said in its last paragraph,
 "because I thought it right to endeavour to keep the property and the
 title together; but I am aware now that my position in regard to my
 debts was of a nature that should have deterred me from the attempt.
 As I have failed, I sincerely hope that my cousin may be made happy
 by some such splendid alliance as she is fully entitled to expect."
 He did not understand all that the words conveyed; but yet he
 questioned them. He did not perceive that they were intended to imply
 that the writer had never for a moment loved the girl whom he had
 proposed to marry. Nevertheless they did convey to him dimly some
 idea that they might give,--not pain, for as to that he would have
 been indifferent,--but offence. "Will there be any good in all that?"
 he asked.
 
 "Certainly," said she. "You don't mean to whine and talk of your
 broken heart."
 
 "Oh dear, no; nothing of that sort."
 
 "This is the manly way to put it, regarding the matter simply as an
 affair of business."
 
 "I believe it is," said he; and then, having picked himself up
 somewhat by the aid of a glass of sherry, he continued to copy the
 letter, and to direct it.
 
 "I will keep the rough draft," said Mrs. Morton.
 
 "And I must go now, I suppose," he said.
 
 "You can stay here and see me eat my dinner if you like. I shall not
 ask you to share it, because it consists of two small mutton chops,
 and one wouldn't keep me up through Lady Teazle."
 
 "I've a good mind to come and see you," said he.
 
 "Then you'd better go and eat your own dinner at once."
 
 "I don't care about my dinner. I should have a bit of supper
 afterwards."
 
 Then she preached to him a sermon; not quite such a one as Emily
 Hotspur had preached, but much more practical, and with less
 reticence. If he went on living as he was living now, he would "come
 to grief." He was drinking every day, and would some day find that he
 could not do so with impunity. Did he know what delirium tremens was?
 Did he want to go to the devil altogether? Had he any hope as to his
 future life?
 
 "Yes," said he, "I hope to make you my wife." She tossed her head,
 and told him that with all the will in the world to sacrifice
 herself, such sacrifice could do him no good if he persisted in
 making himself a drunkard. "But I have been so tried these last two
 months. If you only knew what Mr. Boltby and Captain Stubber and Sir
 Harry and Mr. Hart were altogether. Oh, my G----!" But he did not
 say a word about Messrs. Walker and Bullbean. The poor woman who was
 helping him knew nothing of Walker and Bullbean. Let us hope that she
 may remain in that ignorance.
 
 Cousin George, before he left her, swore that he would amend his mode
 of life, but he did not go to see Lady Teazle that night. There were
 plenty of men now back in town ready to play pool at the club.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XXIII.
 
 "I SHALL NEVER BE MARRIED."
 
 
 Sir Harry Hotspur returned to Humblethwaite before Cousin George's
 letter was written, though when he did return all the terms had been
 arranged, and a portion of the money paid. Perhaps it would have been
 better that he should have waited and taken the letter with him in
 his pocket; but in truth he was so wretched that he could not wait.
 The thing was fixed and done, and he could but hurry home to hide his
 face among his own people. He felt that the glory of his house was
 gone from him. He would sit by the hour together thinking of the boy
 who had died. He had almost, on occasions, allowed himself to forget
 his boy, while hoping that his name and wide domains might be kept
 together by the girl that was left to him. He was beginning to
 understand now that she was already but little better than a wreck.
 Indeed, was not everything shipwreck around him? Was he not going to
 pieces on the rocks? Did not the lesson of every hour seem to tell
 him that, throughout his long life, he had thought too much of his
 house and his name?
 
 It would have been better that he should have waited till the letter
 was in his pocket before he returned home, because, when he reached
 Humblethwaite, the last argument was wanting to him to prove to Emily
 that her hope was vain. Even after his arrival, when the full story
 was told to her, she held out in her resolve. She accepted the truth
 of that scene at Walker's rooms. She acknowledged that her lover had
 cheated the wretched man at cards. After that all other iniquities
 were of course as nothing. There was a completeness in that of which
 she did not fail to accept, and to use the benefit. When she had once
 taken it as true that her lover had robbed his inferior by foul play
 at cards, there could be no good in alluding to this or that lie, in
 counting up this or that disreputable debt, in alluding to habits of
 brandy-drinking, or even in soiling her pure mind with any word as
 to Mrs. Morton. It was granted that he was as vile as sin could make
 him. Had not her Saviour come exactly for such as this one, because
 of His great love for those who were vile; and should not her human
 love for one enable her to do that which His great heavenly love did
 always for all men? Every reader will know how easily answerable
 was the argument. Most readers will also know how hard it is to win
 by attacking the reason when the heart is the fortress that is in
 question. She had accepted his guilt, and why tell her of it any
 further? Did she not pine over his guilt, and weep for it day and
 night, and pray that he might yet be made white as snow? But guilty
 as he was, a poor piece of broken vilest clay, without the properties
 even which are useful to the potter, he was as dear to her as when
 she had leaned against him believing him to be a pillar of gold set
 about with onyx stones, jaspers, and rubies. There was but one sin on
 his part which could divide them. If, indeed, he should cease to love
 her, then there would be an end to it! It would have been better that
 Sir Harry should have remained in London till he could have returned
 with George's autograph letter in his pocket.
 
 "You must have the letter in his own handwriting," Mr. Boltby had
 said, cunningly, "only you must return it to me."
 
 Sir Harry had understood, and had promised, that the letter should
 be returned when it had been used for the cruel purpose for which it
 was to be sent to Humblethwaite. For all Sir Harry's own purposes Mr.
 Boltby's statements would have quite sufficed.
 
 She was told that her lover would renounce her, but she would not
 believe what she was told. Of course he would accept the payment
 of his debts. Of course he would take an income when offered to
 him. What else was he to do? How was he to live decently without
 an income? All these evils had happened to him because he had been
 expected to live as a gentleman without proper means. In fact, he was
 the person who had been most injured. Her father, in his complete, in
 his almost abject tenderness towards her, could not say rough words
 in answer to all these arguments. He could only repeat his assertion
 over and over again that the man was utterly unworthy of her, and
 must be discarded. It was all as nothing. The man must discard
 himself.
 
 "He is false as hell," said Sir Harry.
 
 "And am I to be as false as hell also? Will you love me better when I
 have consented to be untrue? And even that would be a lie. I do love
 him. I must love him. I may be more wicked than he is, because I do
 so. But I do."
 
 Poor Lady Elizabeth in these days was worse than useless. Her
 daughter was so strong that her weakness was as the weakness of
 water. She was driven hither and thither in a way that she herself
 felt to be disgraceful. When her husband told her that the cousin, as
 matter of course, could never be seen again, she assented. When Emily
 implored her to act as mediator with her father on behalf of the
 wicked cousin, she again assented. And then, when she was alone with
 Sir Harry, she did not dare to do as she had promised.
 
 "I do think it will kill her," she said to Sir Harry.
 
 "We must all die, but we need not die disgraced," he said.
 
 It was a most solemn answer, and told the thoughts which had been
 dwelling in his mind. His son had gone from him; and now it might
 be that his daughter must go too, because she could not survive
 the disappointment of her young love. He had learned to think that
 it might be so as he looked at her great grave eyes, and her pale
 cheeks, and her sorrow-laden mouth. It might be so; but better that
 for them all than that she should be contaminated by the touch of
 a thing so vile as this cousin. She was pure as snow, clear as a
 star, lovely as the opening rosebud. As she was, let her go to her
 grave,--if it need be so. For himself, he could die too,--or even
 live if it were required of him! Other fathers, since Jephtha and
 Agamemnon, have recognised it as true that heaven has demanded from
 them their daughters.
 
 The letter came, and was read and re-read by Sir Harry before he
 showed it to his child. He took it also to his wife, and explained it
 to her in all its points. "It has more craft," said he, "than I gave
 him credit for."
 
 "I don't suppose he ever cared for her," said Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "Nor for any human being that ever lived,--save himself. I wonder
 whether he got Boltby to write it for him."
 
 "Surely Mr. Boltby wouldn't have done that."
 
 "I don't know. I think he would do anything to rid us from what he
 believed to have been our danger. I don't think it was in George
 Hotspur to write such a letter out of his own head."
 
 "But does it signify?"
 
 "Not in the least. It is his own handwriting and his signature.
 Whoever formed the words, it is the same thing. It was needed only to
 prove to her that he had not even the merit of being true to her."
 
 For a while Sir Harry thought that he would entrust to his wife the
 duty of showing the letter to Emily. He would so willingly have
 escaped the task himself! But as he considered the matter he feared
 that Lady Elizabeth might lack the firmness to explain the matter
 fully to the poor girl. The daughter would be so much stronger
 than the mother, and thus the thing that must be done would not be
 effected! At last, on the evening of the day on which the letter
 had reached him, he sent for her, and read it to her. She heard it
 without a word. Then he put it into her hands, and she read the
 sentences herself, slowly, one after another, endeavouring as she did
 so to find arguments by which she might stave off the conclusion to
 which she knew that her father would attempt to bring her.
 
 "It must be all over now," said he at last.
 
 She did not answer him, but gazed into his face with such a look of
 woe that his heart was melted. She had found no argument. There had
 not been in the whole letter one word of love for her.
 
 "My darling, will it not be better that we should meet the blow?"
 
 "I have met it, all along. Some day, perhaps, he might be different."
 
 "In what way, dearest? He does not even profess to hope so himself."
 
 "That gentleman in London, Papa, would have paid nothing for him
 unless he wrote like this. He had to do it. Papa, you had better just
 leave me to myself. I will not trouble you by mentioning his name."
 
 "But Emily--"
 
 "Well, Papa?"
 
 "Mamma and I cannot bear that you should suffer alone."
 
 "I must suffer, and silence is the easiest. I will go now and think
 about it. Dear Papa, I know that you have always done everything for
 the best."
 
 He did not see her again that evening. Her mother was with her in
 her own room, and of course they were talking about Cousin George
 for hours together. It could not be avoided, in spite of what Emily
 had herself said of the expediency of silence. But she did not once
 allude to the possibility of a future marriage. As the man was so
 dear to her, and as he bore their name, and as he must inherit her
 father's title, could not some almost superhuman exertion be made for
 his salvation? Surely so much as that might be done, if they all made
 it the work of their lives.
 
 "It must be the work of my life, Mamma," she said.
 
 Lady Elizabeth forbore from telling her that there was no side on
 which she could approach him. The poor girl herself, however, must
 have felt that it was so. As she thought of it all she reminded
 herself that, though they were separated miles asunder, still she
 could pray for him. We need not doubt this at least,--that to him who
 utters them prayers of intercession are of avail.
 
 On the following morning she was at breakfast, and both her father
 and mother remarked that something had been changed in her dress. The
 father only knew that it was so, but the mother could have told of
 every ribbon that had been dropped, and every ornament that had been
 laid aside. Emily Hotspur had lived a while, if not among the gayest
 of the gay, at least among the brightest of the bright in outside
 garniture, and having been asked to consult no questions of expense,
 had taught herself to dress as do the gay and bright and rich. Even
 when George had come on his last wretched visit to Humblethwaite,
 when she had known that he had been brought there as a blackamoor
 perhaps just capable of being washed white, she had not thought it
 necessary to lessen the gauds of her attire. Though she was saddened
 in her joy by the knowledge of the man's faults, she was still the
 rich daughter of a very wealthy man, and engaged to marry the future
 inheritor of all that wealth and riches. There was then no reason why
 she should lower her flag one inch before the world. But now all was
 changed with her! During the night she had thought of her apparel,
 and of what use it might be during her future life. She would never
 more go bright again, unless some miracle might prevail, and he still
 might be to her that which she had painted him. Neither father nor
 mother, as she kissed them both, said a word as to her appearance.
 They must take her away from Humblethwaite, change the scene, try to
 interest her in new pursuits; that was what they had determined to
 attempt. For the present, they would let her put on what clothes she
 pleased, and make no remark.
 
 Early in the day she went out by herself. It was now December, but
 the weather was fine and dry, and she was for two hours alone,
 rambling through the park. She had made her attempt in life, and had
 failed. She owned her failure to herself absolutely. The image had no
 gold in it;--none as yet. But it was not as other images, which, as
 they are made, so must they remain to the end. The Divine Spirit,
 which might from the first have breathed into this clay some particle
 of its own worth, was still efficacious to bestow the gift. Prayer
 should not be wanting; but the thing as it now was she saw in all its
 impurity. He had never loved her. Had he loved her he would not have
 written words such as those she had read. He had pretended to love
 her in order that he might have money, that his debts might be paid,
 that he might not be ruined. "He hoped," he said in his letter, "he
 hoped that his cousin might be made happy by a splendid alliance!"
 She remembered well the abominable, heartless words. And this was
 the man who had pledged her to truth and firmness, and whose own
 truth and firmness she had never doubted for a moment, even when
 acknowledging to herself the necessity of her pledge to him. He had
 never loved her; and, though she did not say so, did not think so,
 she felt that of all his sins that sin was the one which could not be
 forgiven.
 
 What should she now do with herself,--how bear herself at this
 present moment of her life? She did not tell herself now that she
 would die, though as she looked forward into life all was so dreary
 to her, that she would fain have known that death would give an
 escape. But there were duties for her still to do. During that winter
 ramble, she owned to herself for the first time that her father had
 been right in his judgment respecting their cousin, and that she, by
 her pertinacity, had driven her father on till on her account he had
 been forced into conduct which was distasteful to him. She must own
 to her father that he had been right; that the man, though she dearly
 loved him still, was of such nature that it would be quite unfit that
 she should marry him. There might still be the miracle; her prayers
 were still her own to give; of them she would say nothing to her
 father. She would simply confess to him that he had been right, and
 then beg of him to pardon her the trouble she had caused him.
 
 "Papa," she said to him the following morning, "may I come to you?"
 She came in, and on this occasion sat down at his right hand. "Of
 course, you have been right, Papa," she said.
 
 "We have both been right, dearest, I hope."
 
 "No, Papa; I have been wrong! I thought I knew him, and I did not. I
 thought when you told me that he was so bad, that you were believing
 false people; and, Papa, I know now that I should not have loved him
 as I did;--so quickly, like that."
 
 "Nobody has blamed you for a moment. Nobody has thought of blaming
 you."
 
 "I blame myself enough; I can tell you that. I feel as though I had
 in a way destroyed myself."
 
 "Do not say that, my darling."
 
 "You will let me speak now; will you not, Papa? I wish to tell you
 everything, that you may understand all that I feel. I shall never
 get over it."
 
 "You will, dearest; you will, indeed."
 
 "Never! Perhaps I shall live on; but I feel that it has killed me for
 this world. I don't know how a girl is to get over it when she has
 said that she has loved any one. If they are married, then she does
 not want to get over it; but if they are not,--if he deserts her, or
 is unworthy, or both,--what can she do then, but just go on thinking
 of it till--she dies?"
 
 Sir Harry used with her all the old accustomed arguments to drive
 such thoughts out of her head. He told her how good was God to His
 creatures, and, specially, how good in curing by the soft hand of
 time such wounds as those from which she was suffering. She should
 "retrick her beams," and once more "flame in the forehead of the
 morning sky," if only she would help the work of time by her own
 endeavours. "Fight against the feeling, Emily, and try to conquer it,
 and it will be conquered."
 
 "But, Papa, I do not wish to conquer it. I should not tell you of all
 this, only for one thing."
 
 "What thing, dearest?"
 
 "I am not like other girls, who can just leave themselves alone and
 be of no trouble. You told me that if I outlived you--"
 
 "The property will be yours; certainly. Of course, it was my
 hope,--and is,--that all that shall be settled by your marriage
 before my death. The trouble and labour is more than a woman should
 be called on to support alone."
 
 "Just so. And it is because you are thinking of all this, that I feel
 it right to tell you. Papa, I shall never be married."
 
 "We will leave that for the present, Emily."
 
 "Very well; only if it would make a change in your will, you should
 make it. You will have to be here, Papa, after I am gone,--probably."
 
 "No, no, no."
 
 "But, if it were not so, I should not know what to do. That is all,
 Papa; only this,--that I beg your pardon for all the trouble I have
 caused you." Then she knelt before him, and he kissed her head, and
 blessed her, and wept over her.
 
 There was nothing more heard from Cousin George at Humblethwaite, and
 nothing more heard of him for a long time. Mr. Boltby did pay his
 debts, having some terribly hard struggles with Mr. Hart and Captain
 Stubber before the liquidations were satisfactorily effected. It was
 very hard to make Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber understand that the
 Baronet was paying these debts simply because he had said that he
 would pay them once before, under other circumstances, and that no
 other cause for their actual payment now existed. But the debts
 were paid, down to the last farthing of which Mr. Boltby could have
 credible tidings. "Pay everything," Sir Harry had said; "I have
 promised it." Whereby he was alluding to the promise which he had
 made to his daughter. Everything was paid, and Cousin George was able
 to walk in and out of his club, a free man,--and at times almost
 happy,--with an annuity of five hundred pounds a year! Nothing more
 was said to him as to the necessity of expatriation.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XXIV.
 
 THE END.
 
 
 Among playgoing folk, in the following April there was a great deal
 of talk about the marriage of that very favourite actress, Mrs.
 Morton. She appeared in the playbills as Mrs. George Hotspur, late
 Mrs. Morton. Very many spoke of her familiarly, who knew her only on
 the stage,--as is the custom of men in speaking of actresses,--and
 perhaps some few of these who spoke of her did know her personally.
 "Poor Lucy!" said one middle-aged gentleman over fifty, who spent
 four nights of every week at one theatre or another. "When she was
 little more than a child they married her to that reprobate Morton.
 Since that she has managed to keep her head above water by hard work;
 and now she has gone and married another worse than the first!"
 
 "She is older now, and will be able to manage George," said another.
 
 "Manage him! If anybody can manage to keep him out of debt, or from
 drink either, I'll eat him."
 
 "But he must be Sir George when old Sir Harry dies," said he who was
 defending the prudence of the marriage.
 
 "Yes, and won't have a penny. Will it help her to be able to put Lady
 Hotspur on the bills? Not in the least. And the women can't forgive
 her and visit her. She has not been good enough for that. A grand old
 family has been disgraced, and a good actress destroyed. That's my
 idea of this marriage."
 
 "I thought Georgy was going to marry his cousin--that awfully proud
 minx," said one young fellow.
 
 "When it came to the scratch, she would not have him," said another.
 "But there had been promises, and so, to make it all square, Sir
 Harry paid his debts."
 
 "I don't believe a bit about his debts being paid," said the
 middle-aged gentleman who was fond of going to the theatre.
 
 Yes, George Hotspur was married: and, as far as any love went
 with him, had married the woman he liked best. Though the actress
 was worlds too good for him, there was not about her that air of
 cleanliness and almost severe purity which had so distressed him
 while he had been forced to move in the atmosphere of his cousin.
 After the copying of the letter and the settlement of the bills, Mrs.
 Morton had found no difficulty in arranging matters as she pleased.
 She had known the man perhaps better than any one else had known him;
 and yet she thought it best to marry him. We must not inquire into
 her motives, though we may pity her fate.
 
 She did not intend, however, to yield herself as an easy prey to
 his selfishness. She had also her ideas of reforming him, and
 ideas which, as they were much less grand, might possibly be more
 serviceable than those which for a while had filled the mind and
 heart of Emily Hotspur. "George," she said, one day to him, "what
 do you mean to do?" This was before the marriage was fixed;--when
 nothing more was fixed than that idea of marriage which had long
 existed between them.
 
 "Of course we shall be spliced now," said he.
 
 "And if so, what then? I shall keep to the stage, of course."
 
 "We couldn't do with the £500 a year, I suppose, any how?"
 
 "Not very well, I'm afraid, seeing that as a habit you eat and drink
 more than that yourself. But, with all that I can do, there must be a
 change. I tell you for your own sake as well as for mine, unless you
 can drop drinking, we had better give it up even yet." After that,
 for a month or two under her auspices, he did "drop it,"--or at least
 so far dropped it as to induce her to run the risk. In April they
 were married, and she must be added to the list of women who have
 sacrificed themselves on behalf of men whom they have known to be
 worthless. We need not pursue his career further; but we may be sure,
 that though she watched him very closely, and used a power over him
 of which he was afraid, still he went gradually from bad to worse,
 and was found at last to be utterly past redemption. He was one
 who in early life had never known what it was to take delight in
 postponing himself to another; and now there was no spark in him of
 love or gratitude by which fire could be kindled or warmth created.
 It had come to that with him,--that to eat and to drink was all that
 was left to him; and it was coming to that too, that the latter of
 these two pleasant recreations would soon be all that he had within
 his power of enjoyment. There are such men; and of all human beings
 they are the most to be pitied. They have intellects; they do think;
 the hours with them are terribly long;--and they have no hope!
 
 The Hotspurs of Humblethwaite remained at home till Christmas was
 passed, and then at once started for Rome. Sir Harry and Lady
 Elizabeth both felt that it must be infinitely better for their girl
 to be away; and then there came the doctor's slow advice. There was
 nothing radically amiss with Miss Hotspur, the doctor said; but it
 would be better for her to be taken elsewhere. She, knowing how her
 father loved his home and the people around him, begged that she
 might be allowed to stay. Nothing ailed her, she said, save only that
 ache at the heart which no journey to Rome could cure. "What's the
 use of it, Papa?" she said. "You are unhappy because I'm altered.
 Would you wish me not to be altered after what has passed? Of course
 I am altered. Let us take it as it is, and not think about it." She
 had adopted certain practices in life, however, which Sir Harry was
 determined to check, at any rate for the time. She spent her days
 among the poor, and when not with them she was at church. And there
 was always some dreary book in her hands when they were together in
 the drawing-room after dinner. Of church-going and visiting the poor,
 and of good books, Sir Harry approved thoroughly; but even of good
 things such as these there may be too much. So Sir Harry and Lady
 Elizabeth got a courier who spoke all languages, and a footman who
 spoke German, and two maids, of whom one pretended to speak French,
 and had trunks packed without number, and started for Rome. All that
 wealth could do was done; but let the horseman be ever so rich, or
 the horseman's daughter, and the stud be ever so good, it is seldom
 they can ride fast enough to shake off their cares.
 
 In Rome they remained till April, and while they were there the name
 of Cousin George was never once mentioned in the hearing of Sir
 Harry. Between the mother and daughter no doubt there was speech
 concerning him. But to Emily's mind he was always present. He was to
 her as a thing abominable, and yet necessarily tied to her by bonds
 which she could never burst asunder. She felt like some poor princess
 in a tale, married to an ogre from whom there was no escape. She had
 given herself up to one utterly worthless, and she knew it. But yet
 she had given herself, and could not revoke the gift. There was,
 indeed, still left to her that possibility of a miracle, but of
 that she whispered nothing even to her mother. If there were to
 be a miracle, it must be of God; and at God's throne she made her
 whispers. In these days she was taken about from sight to sight with
 apparent willingness. She saw churches, pictures, statues, and ruins,
 and seemed to take an interest in them. She was introduced to the
 Pope, and allowed herself to be apparelled in her very best for that
 august occasion. But, nevertheless, the tenor of her way and the
 fashions of her life, as was her daily dress, were grey and sad and
 solemn. She lived as one who knew that the backbone of her life was
 broken. Early in April they left Rome and went north, to the Italian
 lakes, and settled themselves for a while at Lugano. And here the
 news reached them of the marriage of George Hotspur.
 
 Lady Elizabeth read the marriage among the advertisements in the
 _Times_, and at once took it to Sir Harry, withdrawing the paper from
 the room in a manner which made Emily sure that there was something
 in it which she was not intended to see. But Sir Harry thought that
 the news should be told to her, and he himself told it.
 
 "Already married!" she said. "And who is the lady?"
 
 "You had better not ask, my dear."
 
 "Why not ask? I may, at any rate, know her name."
 
 "Mrs. Morton. She was a widow,--and an actress."
 
 "Oh yes, I know," said Emily, blushing; for in those days in which
 it had been sought to wean her from George Hotspur, a word or two
 about this lady had been said to her by Lady Elizabeth under the
 instructions of Sir Harry. And there was no more said on that
 occasion. On that day, and on the following, her father observed no
 change in her; and the mother spoke nothing of her fears. But on
 the next morning Lady Elizabeth said that she was not as she had
 been. "She is thinking of him still--always," she whispered to her
 husband. He made no reply, but sat alone, out in the garden, with his
 newspaper before him, reading nothing, but cursing that cousin of his
 in his heart.
 
 There could be no miracle now for her! Even the thought of that was
 gone. The man who had made her believe that he loved her, only in the
 last autumn,--though indeed it seemed to her that years had rolled
 over since, and made her old, worn-out, and weary;--who had asked for
 and obtained the one gift she had to give, the bestowal of her very
 self; who had made her in her baby folly believe that he was almost
 divine, whereas he was hardly human in his lowness,--this man, whom
 she still loved in a way which she could not herself understand,
 loving and despising him utterly at the same time,--was now the
 husband of another woman. Even he, she had felt, would have thought
 something of her. But she had been nothing to him but the means of
 escape from disreputable difficulties. She could not sustain her
 contempt for herself as she remembered this, and yet she showed but
 little of it in her outward manner.
 
 "I'll go when you like, Papa," she said when the days of May had
 come, "but I'd sooner stay here a little longer if you wouldn't
 mind." There was no talk of going home. It was only a question
 whether they should go further north, to Lucerne, before the warm
 weather came.
 
 "Of course we will remain; why not?" said Sir Harry. "Mamma and I
 like Lugano amazingly." Poor Sir Harry. As though he could have liked
 any place except Humblethwaite!
 
 Our story is over now. They did remain till the scorching July sun
 had passed over their heads, and August was upon them; and then--they
 had buried her in the small Protestant cemetery at Lugano, and Sir
 Harry Hotspur was without a child and without an heir.
 
 He returned home in the early autumn, a grey, worn-out, tottering old
 man, with large eyes full of sorrow, and a thin mouth that was seldom
 opened to utter a word. In these days, I think, he recurred to
 his early sorrow, and thought almost more of his son than of his
 daughter. But he had instant, pressing energy left to him for one
 deed. Were he to die now without a further will, Humblethwaite and
 Scarrowby would go to the wretch who had destroyed him. What was the
 title to him now, or even the name? His wife's nephew was an Earl
 with an enormous rent-roll, something so large that Humblethwaite and
 Scarrowby to him would be little more than additional labour. But to
 this young man Humblethwaite and Scarrowby were left, and the glories
 of the House of Hotspur were at an end.
 
 And so the story of the House of Humblethwaite has been told.