 That was the mother's hope at
 present,--her hope, when she was positively told by Sir Harry that
 George Hotspur was quite out of the question as a husband for the
 heiress of Humblethwaite. But this would probably come the sooner if
 little or nothing were said of George Hotspur.
 
 The reader need hardly be told that Emily herself regarded the matter
 in a very different light. She also had her ideas about the delicacy
 and the aroma of a maiden's love. She had confessed her love very
 boldly to the man who had asked for it; had made her rich present
 with a free hand, and had grudged nothing in the making of it. But
 having given it, she understood it to be fixed as the heavens that
 she could never give the same gift again. It was herself that she
 had given, and there was no retracting the offering. She had thought,
 and had then hoped, and had afterwards hoped more faintly, that the
 present had been well bestowed;--that in giving it she had disposed
 of herself well. Now they told her that it was not so, and that she
 could hardly have disposed of herself worse. She would not believe
 that; but, let it be as it might, the thing was done. She was his.
 He had a right in her which she could not withdraw from him. Was not
 this sort of giving acknowledged by all churches in which the words
 for "better or for worse" were uttered as part of the marriage vow?
 Here there had been as yet no church vow, and therefore her duty
 was still due to her father. But the sort of sacrifice,--so often a
 sacrifice of the good to the bad,--which the Church not only allowed
 but required and sanctified, could be as well conveyed by one promise
 as by another. What is a vow but a promise? and by what process are
 such vows and promises made fitting between a man and a woman? Is it
 not by that compelled rendering up of the heart which men call love?
 She had found that he was dearer to her than everything in the world
 besides; that to be near him was a luxury to her; that his voice was
 music to her; that the flame of his eyes was sunlight; that his touch
 was to her, as had never been the touch of any other human being.
 She could submit to him, she who never would submit to any one. She
 could delight to do his bidding, even though it were to bring him his
 slippers. She had confessed nothing of this, even to herself, till he
 had spoken to her on the bridge; but then, in a moment, she had known
 that it was so, and had not coyed the truth with him by a single nay.
 And now they told her that he was bad.
 
 Bad as he was, he had been good enough to win her. 'Twas thus she
 argued with herself. Who was she that she should claim for herself
 the right of having a man that was not bad? That other man that had
 come to her, that Lord Alfred, was, she was told, good at all points;
 and he had not moved her in the least. His voice had possessed no
 music for her; and as for fetching his slippers for him,--he was to
 her one of those men who seem to be created just that they might
 be civil when wanted and then get out of the way! She had not been
 able for a moment to bring herself to think of regarding him as her
 husband. But this man, this bad man! From the moment that he had
 spoken to her on the bridge, she knew that she was his for ever.
 
 It might be that she liked a bad man best. So she argued with herself
 again. If it were so she must put up with what misfortune her own
 taste might bring upon her. At any rate the thing was done, and why
 should any man be thrown over simply because the world called him
 bad? Was there to be no forgiveness for wrongs done between man and
 man, when the whole theory of our religion was made to depend on
 forgiveness from God to man? It is the duty of some one to reclaim an
 evident prodigal; and why should it not be her duty to reclaim this
 prodigal? Clearly, the very fact that she loved the prodigal would
 give her a potentiality that way which she would have with no other
 prodigal. It was at any rate her duty to try. It would at least be
 her duty if they would allow her to be near enough to him to make
 the attempt. Then she filled her mind with ideas of a long period
 of probation, in which every best energy of her existence should
 be given to this work of reclaiming the prodigal, so that at last
 she might put her own hand into one that should be clean enough
 to receive it. With such a task before her she could wait. She
 could watch him and give all her heart to his welfare, and never be
 impatient except that he might be made happy. As she thought of this,
 she told herself plainly that the work would not be easy, that there
 would be disappointment, almost heart-break, delays and sorrows; but
 she loved him, and it would be her duty; and then, if she could be
 successful, how great, how full of joy would be the triumph! Even
 if she were to fail and perish in failing, it would be her duty. As
 for giving him up because he had the misfortune to be bad, she would
 as soon give him up on the score of any other misfortune;--because
 he might lose a leg, or become deformed, or be stricken deaf by
 God's hand! One does not desert those one loves, because of their
 misfortunes! 'Twas thus she argued with herself, thinking that she
 could see,--whereas, poor child, she was so very blind!
 
 "Mamma," she said, "has Papa gone up to town about Cousin George?"
 
 "I do not know, my dear. He did not say why he was going."
 
 "I think he has. I wish I could make him understand."
 
 "Understand what, my dear?"
 
 "All that I feel about it. I am sure it would save him much trouble.
 Nothing can ever separate me from my cousin."
 
 "Pray don't say so, Emily."
 
 "Nothing can. Is it not better that you and he should know the truth?
 Papa goes about trying to find out all the naughty things that George
 has ever done. There has been some mistake about a race meeting, and
 all manner of people are asked to give what Papa calls evidence that
 Cousin George was there. I do not doubt but George has been what
 people call dissipated."
 
 "We do hear such dreadful stories!"
 
 "You would not have thought anything about them if it had not been
 for me. He is not worse now than when he came down here last year.
 And he was always asked to Bruton Street."
 
 "What do you mean by this, dear?"
 
 "I do not mean to say that young men ought to do all these things,
 whatever they are,--getting into debt, and betting, and living fast.
 Of course it is very wrong. But when a young man has been brought
 up in that way, I do think he ought not to be thrown over by his
 nearest and dearest friends"--that last epithet was uttered with all
 the emphasis which Emily could give to it--"because he falls into
 temptation."
 
 "I am afraid George has been worse than others, Emily."
 
 "So much the more reason for trying to save him. If a man be in the
 water, you do not refuse to throw him a rope because the water is
 deep."
 
 "But, dearest, your papa is thinking of you." Lady Elizabeth was not
 quick enough of thought to explain to her daughter that if the rope
 be of more value than the man, and if the chance of losing the rope
 be much greater than that of saving the man, then the rope is not
 thrown.
 
 "And I am thinking of George," said Emily.
 
 "But if it should appear that he had done things,--the wickedest
 things in the world?"
 
 "I might break my heart in thinking of it, but I should never give
 him up."
 
 "If he were a murderer?" suggested Lady Elizabeth, with horror.
 
 The girl paused, feeling herself to be hardly pressed, and then came
 that look upon her brow which Lady Elizabeth understood as well as
 did Sir Harry. "Then I would be a murderer's wife," she said.
 
 "Oh, Emily!"
 
 "I must make you understand me, Mamma, and I want Papa to understand
 it too. No consideration on earth shall make me say that I will
 give him up. They may prove if they like that he was on all the
 racecourses in the world, and get that Mrs. Stackpoole to swear to
 it;--and it is ten times worse for a woman to go than it is for a
 man, at any rate;--but it will make no difference. If you and Papa
 tell me not to see him or write to him,--much less to marry him,--of
 course I shall obey you. But I shall not give him up a bit the more,
 and he must not be told that I will give him up. I am sure Papa will
 not wish that anything untrue should be told. George will always be
 to me the dearest thing in the whole world,--dearer than my own soul.
 I shall pray for him every night, and think of him all day long. And
 as to the property, Papa may be quite sure that he can never arrange
 it by any marriage that I shall make. No man shall ever speak to me
 in that way, if I can help it. I won't go where any man can speak to
 me. I will obey,--but it will be at the cost of my life. Of course
 I will obey Papa and you; but I cannot alter my heart. Why was he
 allowed to come here,--the head of our own family,--if he be so bad
 as this? Bad or good, he will always be all the world to me."
 
 To such a daughter as this Lady Elizabeth had very little to say that
 might be of avail. She could quote Sir Harry, and entertain some dim
 distant wish that Cousin George might even yet be found to be not
 quite so black as he had been painted.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XV.
 
 COUSIN GEORGE IS HARD PRESSED.
 
 
 The very sensible and, as one would have thought, very manifest idea
 of buying up Cousin George originated with Mr. Boltby. "He will have
 his price, Sir Harry," said the lawyer. Then Sir Harry's eyes were
 opened, and so excellent did this mode of escape seem to him that he
 was ready to pay almost any price for the article. He saw it at a
 glance. Emily had high-flown notions, and would not yield; he feared
 that she would not yield, let Cousin George's delinquencies be shown
 to be as black as Styx. But if Cousin George could be made to give
 her up,--then Emily must yield; and, yielding in such manner, having
 received so rude a proof of her lover's unworthiness, it could not
 be but that her heart would be changed. Sir Harry's first idea of a
 price was very noble; all debts to be paid, a thousand a year for
 the present, and Scarrowby to be attached to the title. What price
 would be too high to pay for the extrication of his daughter from
 so grievous a misfortune? But Mr. Boltby was more calm. As to the
 payment of the debts,--yes, within a certain liberal limit. For the
 present, an income of five hundred pounds he thought would be almost
 as efficacious a bait as double the amount; and it would be well to
 tack to it the necessity of a residence abroad. It might, perhaps,
 serve to get the young man out of the country for a time. If the
 young man bargained on either of these headings, the matter could be
 reconsidered by Mr. Boltby; as to settling Scarrowby on the title,
 Mr. Boltby was clearly against it. "He would raise every shilling he
 could on post-obits within twelve months." At last the offer was made
 in the terms with which the reader is already acquainted. George was
 sent off from the lawyer's chambers with directions to consider the
 terms, and Mr. Boltby gave his clerk some little instructions for
 perpetuating the irritation on the young man which Hart and Stubber
 together were able to produce. The young man should be made to
 understand that hungry creditors, who had been promised their money
 on certain conditions, could become very hungry indeed.
 
 George Hotspur, blackguard and worthless as he was, did not at first
 realize the fact that Sir Harry and Mr. Boltby were endeavouring to
 buy him. He was asked to give up his cousin, and he was told that
 if he did so a certain very generous amount of pecuniary assistance
 should be given to him; but yet he did not at the first glance
 perceive that one was to be the price of the other,--that if he took
 the one he would meanly have sold the other. It certainly would have
 been very pleasant to have all his debts paid for him, and the offer
 of five hundred pounds a year was very comfortable. Of the additional
 sum to be given when Sir Harry should die, he did not think so much.
 It might probably be a long time coming, and then Sir Harry would
 of course be bound to do something for the title. As for living
 abroad,--he might promise that, but they could not make him keep his
 promise. He would not dislike to travel for six months, on condition
 that he should be well provided with ready money. There was much that
 was alluring in the offer, and he began to think whether he could not
 get it all without actually abandoning his cousin. But then he was to
 give a written pledge to that effect, which, if given, no doubt would
 be shown to her. No; that would not do. Emily was his prize; and
 though he did not value her at her worth, not understanding such
 worth, still he had an idea that she would be true to him. Then at
 last came upon him an understanding of the fact, and he perceived
 that a bribe had been offered to him.
 
 For half a day he was so disgusted at the idea that his virtue was
 rampant within him. Sell his Emily for money? Never! His Emily,--and
 all her rich prospects, and that for a sum so inadequate! They little
 knew their man when they made a proposition so vile! That evening, at
 his club, he wrote a letter to Sir Harry, and the letter as soon as
 written was put into the club letter-box, addressed to the house in
 Bruton Street; in which, with much indignant eloquence, he declared
 that the Baronet little understood the warmth of his love, or the
 extent of his ambition in regard to the family. "I shall be quite
 ready to submit to any settlements," he said, "so long as the
 property is entailed upon the Baronet who shall come after myself;
 I need not say that I hope the happy fellow may be my own son."
 
 But, on the next morning, on his first waking, his ideas were more
 vague, and a circumstance happened which tended to divert them from
 the current in which they had run on the preceding evening. When he
 was going through the sad work of dressing, he bethought himself that
 he could not at once force this marriage on Sir Harry--could not do
 so, perhaps, within a twelvemonth or more, let Emily be ever so true
 to him,--and that his mode of living had become so precarious as
 to be almost incompatible with that outward decency which would be
 necessary for him as Emily's suitor. He was still very indignant at
 the offer made to him, which was indeed bribery of which Sir Harry
 ought to be ashamed; but he almost regretted that his letter to Sir
 Harry had been sent. It had not been considered enough, and certainly
 should not have been written simply on after-dinner consideration.
 Something might have been inserted with the view of producing ready
 money, something which might have had a flavour of yielding, but
 which could not have been shown to Emily as an offer on his part
 to abandon her; and then he had a general feeling that his letter
 had been too grandiloquent,--all arising, no doubt, from a fall in
 courage incidental to a sick stomach.
 
 But before he could get out of his hotel a visitor was upon him.
 Mr. Hart desired to see him. At this moment he would almost have
 preferred to see Captain Stubber. He remembered at the moment that
 Mr. Hart was acquainted with Mr. Walker, and that Mr. Walker would
 probably have sought the society of Mr. Hart after a late occurrence
 in which he, Cousin George, had taken part. He was going across
 to breakfast at his club, when he found himself almost forced to
 accompany Mr. Hart into a little private room at the left hand of the
 hall of the hotel. He wanted his breakfast badly, and was altogether
 out of humour. He had usually found Mr. Hart to be an enduring
 man, not irascible, though very pertinacious, and sometimes almost
 good-natured. For a moment he thought he would bully Mr. Hart, but
 when he looked into Mr. Hart's face, his heart misgave him.
 
 "This is a most inconvenient time--," he had begun. But he hesitated,
 and Mr. Hart began his attack at once.
 
 "Captain 'Oshspur--sir, let me tell you this von't do no longer."
 
 "What won't do, Mr. Hart?"
 
 "Vat von't do? You know vat von't do. Let me tell you this. You'll be
 at the Old Bailey very soon, if you don't do just vat you is told to
 do."
 
 "Me at the Old Bailey!"
 
 "Yes, Captain 'Oshspur,--you at the Old Bailey. In vat vay did you
 get those moneys from poor Mr. Valker? I know vat I says. More than
 three hundred pounds! It was card-sharping."
 
 "Who says it was card-sharping?"
 
 "I says so, Captain 'Oshspur, and so does Mr. Bullbean. Mr. Bullbean
 vill prove it." Mr. Bullbean was a gentleman known well to Mr. Hart,
 who had made one of the little party at Mr. Walker's establishment,
 by means of which Cousin George had gone, flush of money, down among
 his distinguished friends in Norfolk. "Vat did you do with poor
 Valker's moneys? It vas very hard upon poor Mr. Valker,--very hard."
 
 "It was fair play, Mr. Hart."
 
 "Gammon, Captain 'Oshspur! Vere is the moneys?"
 
 "What business is that of yours?"
 
 "Oh, very well. Bullbean is quite ready to go before a
 magistrate,--ready at once. I don't know how that vill help us with
 our pretty cousin with all the fortune."
 
 "How will it help you then?"
 
 "Look here, Captain 'Oshspur; I vill tell you vat vill help me, and
 vill help Captain Stubber, and vill help everybody. The young lady
 isn't for you at all. I know all about it, Captain 'Oshspur. Mr.
 Boltby is a very nice gentleman, and understands business."
 
 "What is Mr. Boltby to me?"
 
 "He is a great deal to me, because he vill pay me my moneys, and he
 vill pay Captain Stubber, and vill pay everybody. He vill pay you
 too, Captain 'Oshspur,--only you must pay poor Valker his moneys.
 I have promised Valker he shall have back his moneys, or Sir Harry
 shall know that too. You must just give up the young woman;--eh,
 Captain 'Oshspur!"
 
 "I'm not going to be dictated to, Mr. Hart."
 
 "When gentlemans is in debt they must be dictated to, or else be
 quodded. We mean to have our money from Mr. Boltby, and that at once.
 Here is the offer to pay it,--every shilling,--and to pay you! You
 must give the lady up. You must go to Mr. Boltby, and write just what
 he tells you. If you don't--!"
 
 "Well, if I don't!"
 
 "By the living God, before two weeks are over you shall be in prison.
 Bullbean saw it all. Now you know, Captain 'Oshspur. You don't like
 dictating to, don't you? If you don't do as you're dictated to, and
 that mighty sharp, as sure as my name is Abraham Hart, everything
 shall come out. Every d----d thing, Captain 'Oshspur! And now good
 morning, Captain 'Oshspur. You had better see Mr. Boltby to-day,
 Captain 'Oshspur."
 
 How was a man so weighted to run for such stakes as those he was
 striving to carry off? When Mr. Hart left him he was not only sick
 in the stomach, but sick at heart also,--sick all over. He had gone
 from bad to worse; he had lost the knowledge of the flavour of vice
 and virtue; and yet now, when there was present to him the vanishing
 possibility of redeeming everything by this great marriage, it seemed
 to him that a life of honourable ease--such a life as Sir Harry would
 wish him to live if permitted to marry the girl and dwell among his
 friends at Humblethwaite--would be much sweeter, much more to his
 real taste, than the life which he had led for the last ten years.
 What had been his positive delights? In what moments had he actually
 enjoyed them? From first to last had there not been trouble and
 danger and vexation of spirit, and a savour of dirt about it all,
 which even to his palate had been nauseous? Would he not willingly
 reform? And yet, when the prospect of reform was brought within reach
 of his eyes, of a reform so pleasant in all its accompaniments, of
 reform amidst all the wealth of Humblethwaite, with Emily Hotspur by
 his side, there came these harpies down upon him rendering it all
 impossible. Thrice, in speaking of them to himself, he called them
 harpies; but it never occurred to him to think by what name Mr.
 Walker would have designated him.
 
 But things around him were becoming so serious that he must do
 something. It might be that he would fall to the ground, losing
 everything. He could not understand about Bullbean. Bullbean had
 had his share of the plunder in regard to all that he had seen. The
 best part of the evening's entertainment had taken place after Mr.
 Bullbean had retired. No doubt, however, Mr. Bullbean might do him a
 damage.
 
 He had written to Sir Harry, refusing altogether the offer made to
 him. Could he, after writing such a letter, at once go to the lawyer
 and accept the offer? And must he admit to himself, finally, that it
 was altogether beyond his power to win his cousin's hand? Was there
 no hope of that life at Humblethwaite which, when contemplated at a
 distance, had seemed to him to be so green and pleasant? And what
 would Emily think of him? In the midst of all his other miseries that
 also was a misery. He was able, though steeped in worthlessness, so
 to make for himself a double identity as to imagine and to personify
 a being who should really possess fine and manly aspirations with
 regard to a woman, and to look upon himself,--his second self,--as
 that being; and to perceive with how withering a contempt such a
 being would contemplate such another man as was in truth the real
 George Hotspur, whose actual sorrows and troubles had now become so
 unendurable.
 
 Who would help him in his distress? The Altringhams were still in
 Scotland, and he knew well that, though Lady Altringham was fond of
 him, and though Lord Altringham liked him, there was no assistance
 to be had there of the kind that he needed. His dearly intimate
 distinguished friends in Norfolk, with whom he had been always
 "George," would not care if they heard that he had been crucified.
 It seemed to him that the world was very hard and very cruel. Who
 did care for him? There were two women who cared for him, who really
 loved him, who would make almost any sacrifice for him, who would
 even forget his sins, or at least forgive them. He was sure of that.
 Emily Hotspur loved him, but there were no means by which he could
 reach Emily Hotspur. She loved him, but she would not so far disobey
 her father and mother, or depart from her own word, as to receive
 even a letter from him. But the other friend who loved him,--he still
 could see her. He knew well the time at which he would find her at
 home, and some three or four hours after his interview with Mr. Hart
 he knocked at Mrs. Morton's door.
 
 "Well, George," she said, "how does your wooing thrive?"
 
 He had no preconceived plan in coming to her. He was possessed by
 that desire, which we all of us so often feel, to be comforted by
 sympathy; but he hardly knew even how to describe the want of it.
 
 "It does not thrive at all," he said, throwing himself gloomily into
 an easy chair.
 
 "That is bad news. Has the lady turned against you?"
 
 "Oh no," said he, moodily,--"nothing of that sort."
 
 "That would be impossible, would it not? Fathers are stern, but to
 such a one as you daughters are always kind. That is what you mean;
 eh, George?"
 
 "I wish you would not chaff me, Lucy. I am not well, and I did not
 come to be chaffed."
 
 "The chaffing is all to be on one side, is it, George? Well; I will
 say nothing to add to your discomforts. What is it ails you? You will
 drink liqueurs after dinner. That is what makes you so wretched. And
 I believe you drink them before dinner too."
 
 "Hardly ever. I don't do such a thing three times in a month. It is
 not that; but things do trouble me so."
 
 "I suppose Sir Harry is not well pleased."
 
 "He is doing what he ought not to do, I must say that;--quite what I
 call ungentlemanlike. A lawyer should never be allowed to interfere
 between gentlemen. I wonder who would stand it, if an attorney were
 set to work to make all manner of inquiries about everything that he
 had ever done?"
 
 "I could not, certainly. I should cave in at once, as the boys say."
 
 "Other men have been as bad as I have, I suppose. He is sending about
 everywhere."
 
 "Not only sending, George, but going himself. Do you know that Sir
 Harry did me the honour of visiting me?"
 
 "No!"
 
 "But he did. He sat there in that very chair, and talked to me in a
 manner that nobody ever did before, certainly. What a fine old man he
 is, and how handsome!"
 
 "Yes; he is a good-looking old fellow."
 
 "So like you, George."
 
 "Is he?"
 
 "Only you know, less,--less,--less, what shall I say?--less
 good-natured, perhaps."
 
 "I know what you mean. He is not such a fool as I am."
 
 "You're not a fool at all, George; but sometimes you are weak. He
 looks to be strong. Is she like him?"
 
 "Very like him."
 
 "Then she must be handsome."
 
 "Handsome; I should think she is too!" said George, quite forgetting
 the description of his cousin which he had given some days previously
 to Mrs. Morton.
 
 She smiled, but took no notice aloud of his blunder. She knew him so
 well that she understood it all. "Yes," she went on; "he came here
 and said some bitter things. He said more, perhaps, than he ought to
 have done."
 
 "About me, Lucy?"
 
 "I think that he spoke chiefly about myself. There was a little
 explanation, and then he behaved very well. I have no quarrel with
 him myself. He is a fine old gentleman; and having one only daughter,
 and a large fortune, I do not wonder that he should want to make
 inquiries before he gives her to you."
 
 "He could do that without an attorney."
 
 "Would you tell him the truth? The fact is, George, that you are not
 the sort of son-in-law that fathers like. I suppose it will be off;
 eh, George?" George made no immediate reply. "It is not likely that
 she should have the constancy to stick to it for years, and I am sure
 you will not. Has he offered you money?" Then George told her almost
 with accuracy the nature of the proposition made to him.
 
 "It is very generous," she said.
 
 "I don't see much of that."
 
 "It certainly is very generous."
 
 "What ought a fellow to do?"
 
 "Only fancy, that you should come to me to ask me such a question!"
 
 "I know you will tell me true."
 
 "Do you love her?"
 
 "Yes."
 
 "With all your heart?"
 
 "What is the meaning of that? I do love her."
 
 "Better than her father's money?"
 
 "Much better."
 
 "Then stick to her through thick and thin. But you don't. I must not
 advise you in accordance with what you say, but with what I think.
 You will be beaten, certainly. She will never be your wife; and were
 you so married, you would not be happy with such people. But she
 will never be your wife. Take Sir Harry's offer, and write to her a
 letter, explaining how it is best for all that you should do so."
 
 He paused a moment, and then he asked her one other question: "Would
 you write the letter for me, Lucy?"
 
 She smiled again as she answered him: "Yes; if you make up your mind
 to do as Sir Harry asks you, I will write a draft of what I think you
 should say to her."
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XVI.
 
 SIR HARRY'S RETURN.
 
 
 Sir Harry received the grandly worded and indignant letter which had
 been written at the club, and Cousin George hesitated as to that
 other letter which his friend was to dictate for him. Consequently it
 became necessary that Sir Harry should leave London before the matter
 was settled. In truth the old Baronet liked the grandly worded and
 indignant letter. It was almost such a letter as a Hotspur should
 write on such an occasion. There was an admission of pecuniary
 weakness which did not quite become a Hotspur, but otherwise the
 letter was a good letter. Before he left London he took the letter
 with him to Mr. Boltby, and on his way thither could not refrain from
 counting up all the good things which would befall him and his if
 only this young man might be reclaimed and recast in a mould such as
 should fit the heir of the Hotspurs. He had been very bad,--so bad
 that when Sir Harry counted up his sins they seemed to be as black
 as night. And then, as he thought of them, the father would declare
 to himself that he would not imperil his daughter by trusting her
 to one who had shown himself to be so evil. But again another mode
 of looking at it all would come upon him. The kind of vice of which
 George had been undoubtedly guilty was very distasteful to Sir Harry;
 it had been ignoble and ungentlemanlike vice. He had been a liar,
 and not only a gambler, but a professional gambler. He had not
 simply got into debt, but he had got into debt in a fashion that was
 fraudulent;--so at least Sir Harry thought. And yet, need it be said
 that this reprobate was beyond the reach of all forgiveness? Had not
 men before him done as bad, and yet were brought back within the pale
 of decent life? In this still vacillating mood of mind Sir Harry
 reached his lawyer's. Mr. Boltby did not vacillate at all. When he
 was shown the letter he merely smiled.
 
 "I don't think it is a bad letter," said Sir Harry.
 
 "Words mean so little, Sir Harry," said Mr. Boltby, "and come so
 cheap."
 
 Sir Harry turned the letter over in his hand and frowned; he did not
 quite like to be told even by his confidential lawyer that he was
 mistaken. Unconsciously he was telling himself that after all George
 Hotspur had been born a gentleman, and that therefore, underlying all
 the young man's vileness and villany there must be a substratum of
 noble soil of which the lawyer perhaps knew nothing. Mr. Boltby saw
 that his client was doubting, and having given much trouble to the
 matter, and not being afraid of Sir Harry, he determined to speak his
 mind freely.
 
 "Sir Harry," he said, "in this matter I must tell you what I really
 think."
 
 "Certainly."
 
 "I am sorry to have to speak ill of one bearing your name; and were
 not the matter urgent as it is, I should probably repress something
 of my opinion. As it is, I do not dare to do so. You could not in all
 London find a man less fit to be the husband of Miss Hotspur than her
 cousin."
 
 "He is a gentleman--by birth," said Sir Harry.
 
 "He is an unprincipled blackguard by education, and the more
 blackguard because of his birth; there is nothing too bad for him to
 do, and very little so bad but what he has done it. He is a gambler,
 a swindler, and, as I believe, a forger and a card-sharper. He has
 lived upon the wages of the woman he has professed to love. He has
 shown himself to be utterly spiritless, abominable, and vile. If my
 clerk in the next room were to slap his face, I do not believe that
 he would resent it." Sir Harry frowned, and moved his feet rapidly
 on the floor. "In my thorough respect and regard for you, Sir Harry,"
 continued Mr. Boltby, "I have undertaken a work which I would not
 have done for above two or three other men in the world beside
 yourself. I am bound to tell you the result, which is this,--that I
 would sooner give my own girl to the sweeper at the crossing than to
 George Hotspur."
 
 Sir Harry's brow was very black. Perhaps he had not quite known his
 lawyer. Perhaps it was that he had less power of endurance than
 he had himself thought in regard to the mention of his own family
 affairs. "Of course," he said, "I am greatly indebted to you, Mr.
 Boltby, for the trouble you have taken."
 
 "I only hope it may be of service to you."
 
 "It has been of service. What may be the result in regard to this
 unfortunate young man I cannot yet say. He has refused our offer,--I
 must say as I think--honourably."
 
 "It means nothing."
 
 "How nothing, Mr. Boltby?"
 
 "No man accepts such a bargain at first. He is playing his hand
 against yours, Sir Harry, and he knows that he has got a very good
 card in his own. It was not to be supposed that he would give in at
 once. In besieging a town the surest way is to starve the garrison.
 Wait a while and he will give in. When a town has within its walls
 such vultures as will now settle upon him, it cannot stand out very
 long. I shall hear more of him before many days are over."
 
 "You think, then, that I may return to Humblethwaite."
 
 "Certainly, Sir Harry; but I hope, Sir Harry, that you will return
 with the settled conviction on your mind that this young man must not
 on any consideration be allowed to enter your family."
 
 The lawyer meant well, but he overdid his work. Sir Harry got up and
 shook hands with him and thanked him, but left the room with some
 sense of offence. He had come to Mr. Boltby for information, and
 he had received it. But he was not quite sure that he had intended
 that Mr. Boltby should advise him touching his management of his
 own daughter. Mr. Boltby, he thought, had gone a little beyond his
 tether. Sir Harry acknowledged to himself that he had learned a great
 deal about his cousin, and it was for him to judge after that whether
 he would receive his cousin at Humblethwaite. Mr. Boltby should not
 have spoken about the crossing-sweeper. And then Sir Harry was not
 quite sure that he liked that idea of setting vultures upon a man;
 and Sir Harry remembered something of his old lore as a hunting man.
 It is astonishing what blood will do in bringing a horse through mud
 at the end of a long day. Mr. Boltby probably did not understand how
 much, at the very last, might be expected from breeding. When Sir
 Harry left Mr. Boltby's chambers he was almost better-minded towards
 Cousin George than he had been when he entered them; and in this
 frame of mind, both for and against the young man, he returned to
 Humblethwaite. It must not be supposed, however, that as the result
 of the whole he was prepared to yield. He knew, beyond all doubt,
 that his cousin was thoroughly a bad subject,--a worthless and, as
 he believed, an irredeemable scamp; but yet he thought of what might
 happen if he were to yield!
 
 Things were very sombre when he reached Humblethwaite. Of course
 his wife could not refrain from questions. "It is very bad," he
 said,--"as bad as can be."
 
 "He has gambled?"
 
 "Gambled! If that were all! You had better not ask about it; he is a
 disgrace to the family."
 
 "Then there can be no hope for Emily?"
 
 "No hope! Why should there not be hope? All her life need not depend
 on her fancy for a man of whom after all she has not seen so very
 much. She must get over it. Other girls have had to do the same."
 
 "She is not like other girls, Harry."
 
 "How not like them?"
 
 "I think she is more persistent; she has set her heart upon loving
 this young man, and she will love him."
 
 "Then she must."
 
 "She will break her heart," said Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "She will break mine, I know," said Sir Harry.
 
 When he met his daughter he had embraced her, and she had kissed
 him and asked after his welfare; but he felt at once that she was
 different from what she used to be,--different, not only as regarded
 herself, but different also in her manner. There came upon him a sad,
 ponderous conviction that the sunlight had gone out from their joint
 lives, that all pleasant things were over for both of them, and that,
 as for him, it would be well for him that he should die. He could
 not be happy if there were discord between him and his child,--and
 there must be discord. The man had been invited with a price to take
 himself off, and had not been sufficiently ignoble to accept the
 offer. How could he avoid the discord, and bring back the warmth of
 the sun into his house? Then he remembered those terribly forcible
 epithets which Mr. Boltby had spoken. "He is an unprincipled
 blackguard; and the worse blackguard because of his birth." The words
 had made Sir Harry angry, but he believed them to be true. If there
 were to be any yielding, he would not yield as yet; but that living
 in his house without sunshine was very grievous to him. "She will
 kill me," he said to himself, "if she goes on like this."
 
 And yet it was hard to say of what it was that he complained. Days
 went by and his daughter said nothing and did nothing of which he
 could complain. It was simply this,--that the sunshine was no longer
 bright within his halls. Days went by, and George Hotspur's name had
 never been spoken by Emily in the hearing of her father or mother.
 Such duties as there were for her to do were done. The active duties
 of a girl in her position are very few. It was her custom of a
 morning to spread butter on a bit of toast for her father to eat.
 This she still did, and brought it to him as was her wont; but
 she did not bring it with her old manner. It was a thing still
 done,--simply because not to do it would be an omission to be
 remarked. "Never mind it," said her father the fourth or fifth
 morning after his return, "I'd sooner do it for myself." She did
 not say a word, but on the next morning the little ceremony, which
 had once been so full of pleasant affection, was discontinued. She
 had certain hours of reading, and these were prolonged rather than
 abandoned. But both her father and mother perceived that her books
 were changed; her Italian was given up, and she took to works of
 religion,--sermons, treatises, and long commentaries.
 
 "It will kill me," said Sir Harry to his wife.
 
 "I am afraid it will kill her," said Lady Elizabeth. "Do you see how
 her colour has gone, and she eats so little!"
 
 "She walks every day."
 
 "Yes; and comes in so tired. And she goes to church every Wednesday
 and Friday at Hesket. I'm sure she is not fit for it such weather as
 this."
 
 "She has the carriage?"
 
 "No, she walks."
 
 Then Sir Harry gave orders that his daughter should always have the
 carriage on Wednesdays and Fridays. But Emily, when her mother told
 her this, insisted that she would sooner walk.
 
 But what did the carriage or no carriage on Wednesday signify? The
 trouble was deeper than that. It was so deep that both father and
 mother felt that something must be done, or the trouble would become
 too heavy for their backs. Ten days passed and nothing was heard
 either from Mr. Boltby or from Cousin George. Sir Harry hardly knew
 what it was then he expected to hear; but it seemed that he did
 expect something. He was nervous at the hour of post, and was aware
 himself that he was existing on from day to day with the idea of soon
 doing some special thing,--he knew not what,--but something that
 might put an end to the frightful condition of estrangement between
 him and his child in which he was now living. It told even upon his
 duty among his tenants. It told upon his farm. It told upon almost
 every workman in the parish. He had no heart for doing anything. It
 did not seem certain to him that he could continue to live in his own
 house. He could not bring himself to order that this wood should be
 cut, or that those projected cottages should be built. Everything was
 at a standstill; and it was clear to him that Emily knew that all
 this had come from her rash love for her cousin George. She never
 now came and stood at his elbow in his own room, or leaned upon his
 shoulder; she never now asked him questions, or brought him out from
 his papers to decide questions in the garden,--or rather to allow
 himself to be ruled by her decisions. There were greetings between
 them morning and evening, and questions were asked and answered
 formally; but there was no conversation. "What have I done that I
 should be punished in this way?" said Sir Harry to himself.
 
 If he was prompt to think himself hardly used, so also was his
 daughter. In considering the matter in her own mind she had found it
 to be her duty to obey her father in her outward conduct, founding
 her convictions in this matter upon precedent and upon the general
 convictions of the world. In the matter of bestowing herself upon
 a suitor, a girl is held to be subject to her parents. So much she
 knew, or believed that she knew; and therefore she would obey. She
 had read and heard of girls who would correspond with their lovers
 clandestinely, would run away with their lovers, would marry their
 lovers as it were behind their fathers' backs. No act of this kind
 would she do. She had something within her which would make it
 dreadful to her ever to have to admit that she had been personally
 wrong,--some mixture of pride and principle, which was strong enough
 to keep her stedfast in her promised obedience. She would do nothing
 that could be thrown in her teeth; nothing that could be called
 unfeminine, indelicate, or undutiful. But she had high ideas of what
 was due to herself, and conceived that she would be wronged by her
 father, should her father take advantage of her sense of duty to
 crush her heart. She had her own rights and her own privileges, with
 which grievous and cruel interference would be made, should her
 father, because he was her father, rob her of the only thing which
 was sweet to her taste or desirable in her esteem. Because she was
 his heiress he had no right to make her his slave. But even should he
 do so, she had in her own hands a certain security. The bondage of a
 slave no doubt he might allot to her, but not the task-work. Because
 she would cling to her duty and keep the promise which she had made
 to him, it would be in his power to prevent the marriage upon which
 she had set her heart; but it was not within his power, or within
 his privilege as a father, to force upon her any other marriage. She
 would never help him with her hand in that adjustment of his property
 of which he thought so much unless he would help her in her love.
 And in the meantime sunshine should be banished from the house, such
 sunshine as had shone round her head. She did not so esteem herself
 as to suppose that, because she was sad, therefore her father
 and mother would be wretched; but she did feel herself bound to
 contribute to the house in general all the wretchedness which might
 come from her own want of sunlight. She suffered under a terrible
 feeling of ill-usage. Why was she, because she was a girl and
 an heiress, to be debarred from her own happiness? If she were
 willing to risk herself, why should others interfere? And if the
 life and conduct of her cousin were in truth so bad as they were
 represented,--which she did not in the least believe,--why had he
 been allowed to come within her reach? It was not only that he was
 young, clever, handsome, and in every way attractive, but that, in
 addition to all this, he was a Hotspur, and would some day be the
 head of the Hotspurs.