 But on the following morning she would repeat her
 prayer. On that evening not a word was said about George while Sir
 Harry and Lady Elizabeth were together with their daughter. Emily had
 made her plan, and she clung to it. Her father was very gentle with
 her, sitting close to her as she played some pieces of music to him
 in the evening, caressing her and looking lovingly into her eyes, as
 he bade God bless her when she left him for the night; but he had
 determined to say nothing to encourage her. He was still minded that
 there could be no such encouragement; but he doubted;--in his heart
 of hearts he doubted. He would still have bought off Cousin George
 by the sacrifice of half his property, and yet he doubted. After all,
 there would be some consolation in that binding together of the name
 and the property.
 
 "What will you say to him?" Lady Elizabeth asked her husband that
 night.
 
 "Tell him to go away."
 
 "Nothing more than that?"
 
 "What more is there to say? If he be willing to be bought, I will buy
 him. I will pay his debts and give him an income."
 
 "You think, then, there can be no hope?"
 
 "Hope!--for whom?"
 
 "For Emily."
 
 "I hope to preserve her--from a--scoundrel." And yet he had thought
 of the consolation!
 
 Emily was very persistent in carrying out her plan. Prayers at
 Humblethwaite were always read with admirable punctuality at a
 quarter-past nine, so that breakfast might be commenced at half-past.
 Sir Harry every week-day was in his own room for three-quarters of an
 hour before prayers. All this was like clock-work at Humblethwaite.
 There would always be some man or men with Sir Harry during these
 three-quarters of an hour,--a tenant, a gamekeeper, a groom, a
 gardener, or a bailiff. But Emily calculated that if she made her
 appearance and held her ground, the tenant or the bailiff would
 give way, and that thus she would ensure a private interview with
 her father. Were she to wait till after breakfast, this would be
 difficult. A very few minutes after the half-hour she knocked at the
 door and was admitted. The village blacksmith was then suggesting a
 new smithy.
 
 "Papa," said Emily, "if you would allow me half a minute--"
 
 The village blacksmith and the bailiff, who was also present,
 withdrew, bowing to Emily, who gave to each of them a smile and a
 nod. They were her old familiar friends, and they looked kindly at
 her. She was to be their future lady; but was it not all important
 that their future lord should be a Hotspur?
 
 Sir Harry had thought it not improbable that his daughter would come
 to him, but would have preferred to avoid the interview if possible.
 Here it was, however, and could not be avoided.
 
 "Papa," she said, kissing him, "you are going to Penrith to-day."
 
 "Yes, my dear."
 
 "To see Cousin George?"
 
 "Yes, Emily."
 
 "Will you remember what we were saying the other day;--what I said?"
 
 "I will endeavour to do my duty as best I may," said Sir Harry, after
 a pause.
 
 "I am sure you will, Papa;--and so do I. I do endeavour to do my
 duty. Will you not try to help him?"
 
 "Certainly, I will try to help him; for your sake rather than for his
 own. If I can help him with money, by paying his debts and giving him
 means to live, I will do so."
 
 "Papa, that is not what I mean."
 
 "What else can I do?"
 
 "Save him from the evil of his ways."
 
 "I will try. I would,--if I knew how,--even if only for the name's
 sake."
 
 "For my sake also, Papa. Papa, let us do it together; you and I and
 Mamma. Let him come here."
 
 "It is impossible."
 
 "Let him come here," she said, as though disregarding his refusal.
 "You need not be afraid of me. I know how much there is to do that
 will be very hard in doing before any,--any other arrangement can be
 talked about."
 
 "I am not afraid of you, my child."
 
 "Let him come, then."
 
 "No;--it would do no good. Do you think he would live here quietly?"
 
 "Try him."
 
 "What would people say?"
 
 "Never mind what people would say: he is our cousin; he is your heir.
 He is the person whom I love best in all the world. Have you not a
 right to have him here if you wish it? I know what you are thinking
 of; but, Papa, there can never be anybody else;--never."
 
 "Emily, you will kill me, I think."
 
 "Dear Papa, let us see if we cannot try. And, oh, Papa, pray, pray
 let me see him." When she went away the bailiff and the blacksmith
 returned; but Sir Harry's power of resistance was gone, so that he
 succumbed to the new smithy without a word.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XX.
 
 COUSIN GEORGE'S SUCCESS.
 
 
 Thoughts crowded quick into the mind of Sir Harry Hotspur as he
 had himself driven over to Penrith. It was a dull, dreary day in
 November, and he took the close carriage. The distance was about ten
 miles, and he had therefore something above an hour for thinking.
 When men think much, they can rarely decide. The affairs as to which
 a man has once acknowledged to himself that he may be either wise or
 foolish, prudent or imprudent, are seldom matters on which he can by
 any amount of thought bring himself to a purpose which to his own
 eyes shall be clearly correct. When he can decide without thinking,
 then he can decide without a doubt, and with perfect satisfaction.
 But in this matter Sir Harry thought much. There had been various
 times at which he was quite sure that it was his duty to repudiate
 this cousin utterly. There had never been a time at which he had been
 willing to accept him. Nevertheless, at this moment, with all his
 struggles of thought he could not resolve. Was his higher duty due
 to his daughter, or to his family,--and through his family to his
 country, which, as he believed, owed its security and glory to the
 maintenance of its aristocracy? Would he be justified,--justified
 in any degree,--in subjecting his child to danger in the hope that
 his name and family pride might be maintained? Might he take his own
 desires in that direction as any make-weight towards a compliance
 with his girl's strong wishes, grounded as they were on quite other
 reasons? Mr. Boltby had been very eager in telling him that he ought
 to have nothing to say to this cousin, had loaded the cousin's name
 with every imaginable evil epithet; and of Mr. Boltby's truth and
 honesty there could be no doubt. But then Mr. Boltby had certainly
 exceeded his duty, and was of course disposed, by his professional
 view of the matter, to think any step the wisest which would tend to
 save the property from dangerous hands. Sir Harry felt that there
 were things to be saved of more value than the property;--the family,
 the title, perhaps that reprobate cousin himself; and then, above
 all, his child. He did believe that his child would not smile for him
 again, unless he would consent to make some effort in favour of her
 lover.
 
 Doubtless the man was very bad. Sir Harry was sick at heart as
 he thought of the evil nature of the young man's vices. Of a man
 debauched in his life, extravagant with his money, even of a gambler,
 a drunkard, one fond of low men and of low women;--of one even such
 as this there might be hope, and the vicious man, if he will give up
 his vices, may still be loved and at last respected. But of a liar, a
 swindler, one mean as well as vicious, what hope could there be? It
 was essential to Sir Harry that the husband of his daughter should at
 any rate be a gentleman. The man's blood, indeed, was good; and blood
 will show at last, let the mud be ever so deep. So said Sir Harry to
 himself. And Emily would consent that the man should be tried by what
 severest fire might be kindled for the trying of him. If there were
 any gold there, it might be possible to send the dross adrift, and
 to get the gold without alloy. Could Lady Altringham have read Sir
 Harry's mind as his carriage was pulled up, just at twelve o'clock,
 at the door of the Penrith Crown, she would have been stronger than
 ever in her belief that young lovers, if they be firm, can always
 conquer opposing parents.
 
 But alas, alas, there was no gold with this dross, and in that matter
 of blood, as to which Sir Harry's ideas were so strong, and indeed
 so noble, he entertained but a muddled theory. Noblesse oblige. High
 position will demand, and will often exact, high work. But that rule
 holds as good with a Buonaparte as with a Bourbon, with a Cromwell
 as with a Stewart; and succeeds as often and fails as often with
 the low born as with the high. And good blood too will have its
 effect,--physical for the most part,--and will produce bottom,
 lasting courage, that capacity of carrying on through the mud to
 which Sir Harry was wont to allude; but good blood will bring no
 man back to honesty. The two things together, no doubt, assist in
 producing the highest order of self-denying man.
 
 When Sir Harry got out of his carriage, he had not yet made up his
 mind. The waiter had been told that he was expected, and showed him
 up at once into the large sitting-room looking out into the street,
 which Cousin George had bespoke for the occasion. He had had a
 smaller room himself, but had been smoking there, and at this moment
 in that room there was a decanter and a wine-glass on the chiffonier
 in one corner. He had heard the bustle of the arrival, and had at
 once gone into the saloon prepared for the reception of the great
 man. "I am so sorry to give you this trouble," said Cousin George,
 coming forward to greet his cousin. Sir Harry could not refuse his
 cousin's hand, though he would willingly have done so, had it been
 possible. "I should not mind the trouble," he said, "if it were of
 any use. I fear it can be of none."
 
 "I hope you will not be prejudiced against me, Sir Harry."
 
 "I trust that I am not prejudiced against any one. What is it that
 you wish me to do?"
 
 "I want permission to go to Humblethwaite, as a suitor for your
 daughter's hand." So far Cousin George had prepared his speech
 beforehand.
 
 "And what have you to recommend you to a father for such permission?
 Do you not know, sir, that when a gentleman proposes to a lady it is
 his duty to show that he is in a condition fit for the position which
 he seeks; that in character, in means, in rank, in conduct, he is at
 least her equal."
 
 "As for our rank, Sir Harry, it is the same."
 
 "And for your means? You know that my daughter is my heiress?"
 
 "I do; but it is not that that has brought me to her. Of course,
 I have nothing. But then, you know, though she will inherit the
 estates, I must inherit--"
 
 "If you please, sir, we will not go into all that again," said Sir
 Harry, interrupting him. "I explained to you before, sir, that
 I would have admitted your future rank as a counterpoise to her
 fortune, if I could have trusted your character. I cannot trust it. I
 do not know why you should thrust upon me the necessity of saying all
 this again. As I believe that you are in pecuniary distress, I made
 you an offer which I thought to be liberal."
 
 "It was liberal, but it did not suit me to accept it." George had
 an inkling of what would pass within Sir Harry's bosom as to the
 acceptance or rejection of that offer. "I wrote to you, declining it,
 and as I have received no answer, I thought that I would just run
 down. What was I to do?"
 
 "Do? How can I tell? Pay your debts. The money was offered you."
 
 "I cannot give up my cousin. Has she been allowed to receive the
 letter which I left for her yesterday?"
 
 Now Sir Harry had doubted much in his own mind as to the letter.
 During that morning's interview it had still been in his own
 possession. As he was preparing to leave the house he had made
 up his mind that she should have it; and Lady Elizabeth had been
 commissioned to give it her, not without instruction and explanation.
 Her father would not keep it from her, because he trusted her
 implicitly; but she was to understand that it could mean nothing to
 her, and that the letter must not of course be answered.
 
 "It does not matter whether she did or did not," said Sir Harry.
 "I ask you again, whether you will accept the offer made you by Mr.
 Boltby, and give me your written promise not to renew this suit."
 
 "I cannot do that, Sir Harry."
 
 Sir Harry did not know how to proceed with the interview. As he had
 come there, some proposition must be made by himself. Had he intended
 to be altogether obstinate he should have remained at Humblethwaite,
 and kept his cousin altogether out of the house. And now his
 daughter's prayers were ringing in his ears: "Dear Papa, let us see
 if we cannot try." And then again that assurance which she had made
 him so solemnly: "Papa, there never can be anybody else!" If the
 black sheep could be washed white, the good of such washing would on
 every side be so great! He would have to blush,--let the washing be
 ever so perfect,--he must always blush in having such a son-in-law;
 but he had been forced to acknowledge to himself of late, that there
 was infinitely more of trouble and shame in this world than of joy or
 honour. Was it not in itself a disgrace that a Hotspur should do such
 things as this cousin had done; and a disgrace also that his daughter
 should have loved a man so unfit to be her lover? And then from day
 to day, and from hour to hour, he remembered that these ills were
 added to the death of that son, who, had he lived, would have been
 such a glory to him. More of trouble and disgrace! Was it not all
 trouble and disgrace? He would have wished that the day might come
 for him to go away and leave it all, were it not that for one
 placed as he was placed his own life would not see the end of these
 troubles. He must endeavour to provide that everything should not go
 to utter ruin as soon as he should have taken his departure.
 
 He walked about the room, again trying to think. Or, perhaps, all
 thinking was over with him now, and he was resolving in his own mind
 how best he might begin to yield. He must obey his daughter. He could
 not break the heart of the only child that was left to him. He had no
 delight in the world other than what came to him reflected back from
 her. He felt now as though he was simply a steward endeavouring on
 her behalf to manage things to the best advantage; but still only a
 steward, and as such only a servant who could not at last decide on
 the mode of management to be adopted. He could endeavour to persuade,
 but she must decide. Now his daughter had decided, and he must begin
 this task, so utterly distasteful to him, of endeavouring to wash the
 blackamoor white.
 
 "What are you willing to do?" he asked.
 
 "How to do, Sir Harry?"
 
 "You have led a bad life."
 
 "I suppose I have, Sir Harry."
 
 "How will you show yourself willing to reform it?"
 
 "Only pay my debts and set me up with ready money, and I'll go along
 as slick as grease!" Thus would Cousin George have answered the
 question had he spoken his mind freely. But he knew that he might not
 be so explicit. He must promise much; but, of course, in making his
 promise he must arrange about his debts. "I'll do almost anything
 you like. Only try me. Of course it would be so much easier if those
 debts were paid off. I'll give up races altogether, if you mean that,
 Sir Harry. Indeed, I'm ready to give up anything."
 
 "Will you give up London?"
 
 "London!" In simple truth, George did not quite understand the
 proposition.
 
 "Yes; will you leave London? Will you go and live at Scarrowby, and
 learn to look after the farm and the place?"
 
 George's face fell,--his face being less used to lying than his
 tongue; but his tongue lied at once: "Oh yes, certainly, if you wish
 it. I should rather like a life of that sort. For how long would it
 be?"
 
 "For two years," said Sir Harry, grimly.
 
 Cousin George, in truth, did not understand. He thought that he was
 to take his bride with him when he went to Scarrowby. "Perhaps Emily
 would not like it," he said.
 
 "It is what she desires. You do not suppose that she knows so little
 of your past life as to be willing to trust herself into your hands
 at once. She is attached to you."
 
 "And so am I to her; on my honour I am. I'm sure you don't doubt
 that."
 
 Sir Harry doubted every word that fell from his cousin's mouth, but
 still he persevered. He could perceive though he could not analyse,
 and there was hardly a tone which poor Cousin George used which did
 not discourage the Baronet. Still he persevered. He must persevere
 now, even if it were only to prove to Emily how much of basest clay
 and how little of gold there was in this image.
 
 "She is attached to you," he continued, "and you bear our name, and
 will be the head of our family. If you will submit yourself to a
 reformed life, and will prove that you are fit for her, it may be
 possible that after years she should be your wife."
 
 "After years, Sir Harry?"
 
 "Yes, sir,--after years. Do you suppose that the happiness of such an
 one as she can be trusted to such keeping as yours without a trial of
 you? You will find that she has no such hope herself."
 
 "Oh, of course; what she likes--"
 
 "I will pay your debts; on condition that Mr. Boltby is satisfied
 that he has the entire list of them."
 
 George, as he heard this, at once determined that he must persuade
 Mr. Hart to include Mr. Walker's little account in that due to
 himself. It was only a matter of a few hundreds, and might surely be
 arranged when so much real money would be passing from hand to hand.
 
 "I will pay everything; you shall then go down to Scarrowby, and the
 house shall be prepared for you."
 
 It wasn't supposed, George thought, that he was absolutely to live in
 solitary confinement at Scarrowby. He might have a friend or two, and
 then the station was very near.
 
 "You are fond of shooting, and you will have plenty of it there.
 We will get you made a magistrate for the county, and there is
 much to do in looking after the property." Sir Harry became almost
 good-humoured in his tone as he described the kind of life which he
 intended that the blackamoor should live. "We will come to you for a
 month each year, and then you can come to us for a while."
 
 "When shall it begin?" asked Cousin George, as soon as the Baronet
 paused. This was a question difficult to be answered. In fact, the
 arrangement must be commenced at once. Sir Harry knew very well that,
 having so far yielded, he must take his cousin back with him to
 Humblethwaite. He must keep his cousin now in his possession till all
 those debts should be paid, and till the house at Scarrowby should be
 prepared; and he must trust to his daughter's prudence and high sense
 of right not to treat her lover with too tender an acknowledgment of
 her love till he should have been made to pass through the fire of
 reform.
 
 "You had better get ready and come back to Humblethwaite with me
 now," said Sir Harry.
 
 Within five minutes after that there was bustling about the passages
 and hall of the Crown Hotel. Everybody in the house, from the august
 landlord down to the humble stableboy, knew that there had been a
 reconciliation between Sir Harry and his cousin, and that the cousin
 was to be made welcome to all the good the gods could give. While
 Cousin George was packing his things, Sir Harry called for the bill
 and paid it,--without looking at it, because he would not examine how
 the blackamoor had lived while he was still a blackamoor.
 
 "I wonder whether he observed the brandy," thought Cousin George to
 himself.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XXI.
 
 EMILY HOTSPUR'S SERMON.
 
 
 The greater portion of the journey back to Humblethwaite was passed
 in silence. Sir Harry had undertaken an experiment in which he had no
 faith himself, and was sad at heart. Cousin George was cowed, half
 afraid, and yet half triumphant. Could it be possible that he should
 "pull through" after all? Some things had gone so well with him. His
 lady friends had been so true to him! Lady Altringham, and then Mrs.
 Morton,--how good they had been! Dear Lucy! He would never forget
 her. And Emily was such a brick! He was going to see his Emily, and
 that would be "so jolly." Nevertheless, he did acknowledge to himself
 that an Emily prepared to assist her father in sending her lover
 through the fire of reform, would not be altogether "so jolly" as the
 Emily who had leaned against him on the bridge at Airey Force, while
 his arm had been tightly clasped round her waist. He was alive to the
 fact that romance must give place to business.
 
 When they had entered the park-gates, Sir Harry spoke. "You must
 understand, George"--he had not called him George before since the
 engagement had been made known to him--"that you cannot yet be
 admitted here as my daughter's accepted suitor, as might have been
 the case had your past life been different."
 
 "I see all that," said Cousin George.
 
 "It is right that I should tell you so; but I trust implicitly to
 Emily's high sense of duty and propriety. And now that you are here,
 George, I trust that it may be for your advantage and for ours."
 
 Then he pressed his cousin's hand, if not with affection, at least
 with sincerity.
 
 "I'm sure it is to be all right now," said George, calculating
 whether he would be able to escape to London for a few days, so that
 he might be able to arrange that little matter with Mr. Hart. They
 couldn't suppose that he would be able to leave London for two years
 without a day's notice!
 
 Sir Harry got out of the carriage at the front door, and desired
 Cousin George to follow him into the house. He turned at once into
 the small room where George had drunk the sherry, and desired that
 Lady Elizabeth might be sent to him.
 
 "My dear," said he, "I have brought George back with me. We will do
 the best that we can. Mrs. Quick will have a room for him. You had
 better tell Emily, and let her come to me for a moment before she
 sees her cousin." This was all said in George's hearing. And then Sir
 Harry went, leaving his cousin in the hands of Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "I am glad to see you back again, George," she said, with a
 melancholy voice.
 
 Cousin George smiled, and said, that "it would be all right."
 
 "I am sure I hope so, for my girl's sake. But there must be a great
 change, George."
 
 "No end of a change," said Cousin George, who was not in the least
 afraid of Lady Elizabeth.
 
 Many things of moment had to be done in the house that day before
 dinner. In the first place there was a long interview between the
 father and daughter. For a few minutes, perhaps, he was really happy
 when she was kneeling with her arms upon his knees, thanking him for
 what he had done, while tears of joy were streaming down her cheeks.
 He would not bring himself to say a word of caution to her. Would it
 not be to paint the snow white to caution her as to her conduct?
 
 "I have done as you bade me in everything," he said. "I have proposed
 to him that he should go to Scarrowby. It may be that it will be your
 home for a while, dear."
 
 She thanked him and kissed him again and again. She would be so
 good. She would do all she could to deserve his kindness. And as for
 George,--"Pray, Papa, don't think that I suppose that it can be all
 done quite at once." Nevertheless it was in that direction that her
 thoughts erred. It did seem to her that the hard part of the work was
 already done, and that now the pleasant paths of virtue were to be
 trod with happy and persistent feet.
 
 "You had better see him in your mother's presence, dearest, before
 dinner; and then the awkwardness will be less afterwards."
 
 She kissed him again, and ran from his room up to her mother's
 apartment, taking some back stairs well known to herself, lest she
 should by chance meet her lover after some undue and unprepared
 fashion. And there she could sit down and think of it all! She
 would be very discreet. He should be made to understand at once
 that the purgation must be thorough, the reform complete. She would
 acknowledge her love to him,--her great and abiding love; but of
 lover's tenderness there could be but little,--almost none,--till the
 fire had done its work, and the gold should have been separated from
 the dross. She had had her way so far, and they should find that she
 had deserved it.
 
 Before dinner Sir Harry wrote a letter to his lawyer. The mail-cart
 passed through the village on its way to Penrith late in the evening,
 and there was time for him to save the post. He thought it incumbent
 on him to let Mr. Boltby know that he had changed his mind; and,
 though the writing of the letter was not an agreeable task, he did it
 at once. He said nothing to Mr. Boltby directly about his daughter,
 but he made it known to that gentleman that Cousin George was at
 present a guest at Humblethwaite, and that he intended to pay all the
 debts without entering into any other specific engagements. Would Mr.
 Boltby have the goodness to make out a schedule of the debts? Captain
 Hotspur should be instructed to give Mr. Boltby at once all the
 necessary information by letter. Then Sir Harry went on to say that
 perhaps the opinions formed in reference to Captain Hotspur had been
 too severe. He was ashamed of himself as he wrote these words, but
 still they were written. If the blackamoor was to be washed white,
 the washing must be carried out at all times, at all seasons, and in
 every possible manner, till the world should begin to see that the
 blackness was going out of the skin.
 
 Cousin George was summoned to meet the girl who loved him in her
 mother's morning-room, before they dressed for dinner. He did not
 know at all in what way to conduct himself. He had not given a
 moment's thought to it till the difficulty flashed upon him as she
 entered the apartment. But she had considered it all. She came up to
 him quickly, and gave him her lips to kiss, standing there in her
 mother's presence.
 
 "George," she said, "dear George! I am so glad that you are here."
 
 It was the first; and it should be the last,--till the fire had done
 its work; till the fire should at least have done so much of its work
 as to make the remainder easy and fairly sure. He had little to say
 for himself, but muttered something about his being the happiest
 fellow in the world. It was a position in which a man could hardly
 behave well, and neither the mother nor the daughter expected much
 from him. A man cannot bear himself gracefully under the weight of a
 pardon as a woman may do. A man chooses generally that it shall be
 assumed by those with whom he is closely connected that he has done
 and is doing no wrong; and, when wronged, he professes to forgive
 and to forget in silence. To a woman the act of forgiveness, either
 accepted or bestowed, is itself a pleasure. A few words were then
 spoken, mostly by Lady Elizabeth, and the three separated to prepare
 for dinner.
 
 The next day passed over them at Humblethwaite Hall very quietly, but
 with some mild satisfaction. Sir Harry told his cousin of the letter
 to his lawyer, and desired George to make out and send by that day's
 post such a schedule as might be possible on the spur of the moment.
 
 "Hadn't I better run up and see Mr. Boltby?" said Cousin George.
 
 But to this Sir Harry was opposed. Let any calls for money reach them
 there. Whatever the calls might be, he at any rate could pay them.
 Cousin George repeated his suggestion; but acquiesced when Sir Harry
 frowned and showed his displeasure. He did make out a schedule, and
 did write a letter to Mr. Boltby.
 
 "I think my debt to Mr. Hart was put down as £3,250," he wrote, "but
 I believe I should have added another £350 for a transaction as to
 which I fancy he does not hold my note of hand. But the money is
 due."
 
 He was fool enough to think that Mr. Walker's claim might be
 liquidated after this fashion. In the afternoon they rode
 together,--the father, the daughter, and the blackamoor, and much was
 told to Cousin George as to the nature of the property. The names
 of the tenants were mentioned, and the boundaries of the farms were
 pointed out to him. He was thinking all the time whether Mr. Hart
 would spare him.
 
 But Emily Hotspur, though she had been thus reticent and quiet in her
 joy, though she was resolved to be discreet, and knew that there were
 circumstances in her engagement which would for a while deter her
 from being with her accepted lover as other girls are with theirs,
 did not mean to estrange herself from her cousin George. If she were
 to do so, how was she to assist, and take, as she hoped to do, the
 first part in that task of refining the gold on which they were all
 now intent? She was to correspond with him when he was at Scarrowby.
 Such was her present programme, and Sir Harry had made no objection
 when she declared her purpose. Of course they must understand each
 other, and have communion together. On the third day, therefore, it
 was arranged they two should walk, without other company, about the
 place. She must show him her own gardens, which were at some distance
 from the house. If the truth be told, it must be owned that George
 somewhat dreaded the afternoon's amusement; but had she demanded of
 him to sit down to listen to her while she read to him a sermon, he
 would not have refused.
 
 To be didactic and at the same time demonstrative of affection is
 difficult, even with mothers towards their children, though with
 them the assumption of authority creates no sense of injury. Emily
 specially desired to point out to the erring one the paths of virtue,
 and yet to do so without being oppressive.
 
 "It is so nice to have you here, George," she said.
 
 "Yes, indeed; isn't it?" He was walking beside her, and as yet they
 were within view of the house.
 
 "Papa has been so good; isn't he good?"
 
 "Indeed he is. The best man I know out," said George, thinking that
 his gratitude would have been stronger had the Baronet given him the
 money and allowed him to go up to London to settle his own debts.
 
 "And Mamma has been so kind! Mamma is very fond of you. I am sure she
 would do anything for you."
 
 "And you?" said George, looking into her face.
 
 "I!--As for me, George, it is a matter of course now. You do not want
 to be told again what is and ever must be my first interest in the
 world."
 
 "I do not care how often you tell me."
 
 "But you know it; don't you?"
 
 "I know what you said at the waterfall, Emily."
 
 "What I said then I said for always. You may be sure of that. I told
 Mamma so, and Papa. If they had not wanted me to love you, they
 should not have asked you to come here. I do love you, and I hope
 that some day I may be your wife."
 
 She was not leaning on his arm, but as she spoke she stopped, and
 looked stedfastly into his face. He put out his hand as though to
 take hers; but she shook her head, refusing it. "No, George; come on.
 I want to talk to you a great deal. I want to say ever so much,--now,
 to-day. I hope that some day I may be your wife. If I am not, I shall
 never be any man's wife."
 
 "What does some day mean, Emily?"
 
 "Ever so long;--years, perhaps."
 
 "But why? A fellow has to be consulted, you know, as well as
 yourself. What is the use of waiting? I know Sir Harry thinks I have
 been very fond of pleasure. How can I better show him how willing I
 am to give it up than by marrying and settling down at once? I don't
 see what's to be got by waiting?"
 
 Of course she must tell him the truth. She had no idea of keeping
 back the truth. She loved him with all her heart, and was resolved
 to marry him; but the dross must first be purged from the gold. "Of
 course you know, George, that Papa has made objections."
 
 "I know he did, but that is over now. I am to go and live at
 Scarrowby at once, and have the shooting. He can't want me to remain
 there all by myself."
 
 "But he does; and so do I."
 
 "Why?"
 
 In order that he might be made clean by the fire of solitude and the
 hammer of hard work. She could not quite say this to him. "You know,
 George, your life has been one of pleasure."
 
 "I was in the army,--for some years."
 
 "But you left it, and you took to going to races, and they say that
 you gambled and are in debt, and you have been reckless. Is not that
 true, George?"
 
 "It is true."
 
 "And should you wonder that Papa should be afraid to trust his only
 child and all his property to one who,--who knows that he has been
 reckless? But if you can show, for a year or two, that you can give
 up all that--"
 
 "Wouldn't it be all given up if we were married?"
 
 "Indeed, I hope so. I should break my heart otherwise. But can you
 wonder that Papa should wish for some delay and some proof?"
 
 "Two years!"
 
 "Is that much? If I find you doing what he wishes, these two years
 will be so happy to me! We shall come and see you, and you will come
 here. I have never liked Scarrowby, because it is not pretty, as this
 place is; but, oh, how I shall like to go there now! And when you are
 here, Papa will get to be so fond of you. You will be like a real son
 to him. Only you must be steady."
 
 "Steady! by Jove, yes. A fellow will have to be steady at Scarrowby."
 The perfume of the cleanliness of the life proposed to him was not
 sweet to his nostrils.
 
 She did not like this, but she knew that she could not have
 everything at once. "You must know," she said, "that there is a
 bargain between me and Papa. I told him that I should tell you
 everything."
 
 "Yes; I ought to be told everything."
 
 "It is he that shall fix the day. He is to do so much, that he has a
 right to that. I shall never press him, and you must not."
 
 "Oh, but I shall."
 
 "It will be of no use; and, George, I won't let you. I shall scold
 you if you do. When he thinks that you have learned how to manage the
 property, and that your mind is set upon that kind of work, and that
 there are no more races,--mind, and no betting, then,--then he will
 consent. And I will tell you something more if you would like to hear
 it."
 
 "Something pleasant, is it?"
 
 "When he does, and tells me that he is not afraid to give me to you,
 I shall be the happiest girl in all England. Is that pleasant?--No,
 George, no; I will not have it."
 
 "Not give me one kiss?"
 
 "I gave you one when you came, to show you that in truth I loved you.
 I will give you another when Papa says that everything is right."
 
 "Not till then?"
 
 "No, George, not till then. But I shall love you just the same. I
 cannot love you better than I do."
 
 He had nothing for it but to submit, and was obliged to be content
 during the remainder of their long walk with talking of his future
 life at Scarrowby. It was clearly her idea that he should be
 head-farmer, head-steward, head-accountant, and general workman for
 the whole place. When he talked about the game, she brought him back
 to the plough;--so at least he declared to himself. And he could
 elicit no sympathy from her when he reminded her that the nearest
 meet of hounds was twenty miles and more from Scarrowby. "You can
 think of other things for a while," she said. He was obliged to say
 that he would, but it did seem to him that Scarrowby was a sort
 of penal servitude to which he was about to be sent with his own
 concurrence. The scent of the cleanliness was odious to him.
 
 "I don't know what I shall do there of an evening," he said.
 
 "Read," she answered; "there are lots of books, and you can always
 have the magazines. I will send them to you." It was a very dreary
 prospect of life for him, but he could not tell her that it would be
 absolutely unendurable.
 
 When their walk was over,--a walk which she never could forget,
 however long might be her life, so earnest had been her purpose,--he
 was left alone, and took another stroll by himself. How would it suit
 him? Was it possible? Could the event "come off"? Might it not have
 been better for him had he allowed his other loving friend to prepare
 for him the letter to the Baronet, in which Sir Harry's munificent
 offer would have been accepted? Let us do him the justice to remember
 that he was quite incapable of understanding the misery, the utter
 ruin which that letter would have entailed upon her who loved him so
 well. He knew nothing of such sufferings as would have been hers--as
 must be hers, for had she not already fallen haplessly into the pit
 when she had once allowed herself to fix her heart upon a thing so
 base as this? It might have been better, he thought, if that letter
 had been written. A dim dull idea came upon him that he was not fit
 to be this girl's husband. He could not find his joys where she would
 find hers. No doubt it would be a grand thing to own Humblethwaite
 and Scarrowby at some future time; but Sir Harry might live for these
 twenty years, and while Sir Harry lived he must be a slave. And then
 he thought that upon the whole he liked Lucy Morton better than
 Emily Hotspur. He could say what he chose to Lucy, and smoke in her
 presence, own that he was fond of drink, and obtain some sympathy for
 his "book" on the Derby. He began to feel already that he did not
 like sermons from the girl of his heart.
 
 But he had chosen this side now, and he must go on with the game.
 It seemed certain to him that his debts would at any rate be paid.
 He was not at all certain how matters might go in reference to
 Mr. Walker, but if matters came to the worst the Baronet would
 probably be willing to buy him off again with the promised income.
 Nevertheless, he was not comfortable, and certainly did not shine at
 Sir Harry's table. "Why she has loved him, what she has seen in him,
 I cannot tell," said Sir Harry to his wife that night.
 
 We must presume Sir Harry did not know how it is that the birds pair.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XXII.
 
 GEORGE HOTSPUR YIELDS.
 
 
 On the morning of Cousin George's fourth day at Humblethwaite, there
 came a letter for Sir Harry. The post reached the Hall about an hour
 before the time at which the family met for prayers, and the letters
 were taken into Sir Harry's room. The special letter of which mention
 is here made shall be given to the reader entire:--
 
 
    ----, Lincoln's Inn Fields,
    24th Nov. 186--.
 
    MY DEAR SIR HARRY HOTSPUR,--I have received your letter
    in reference to Captain Hotspur's debts, and have also
    received a letter from him, and a list of what he says he
    owes. Of course there can be no difficulty in paying all
    debts which he acknowledges, if you think proper to do so.
    As far as I am able to judge at present, the amount would
    be between twenty-five and thirty thousand pounds. I
    should say nearer the former than the latter sum, did
    I not know that the amount in such matters always goes
    on increasing. You must also understand that I cannot
    guarantee the correctness of this statement.
 
    But I feel myself bound in my duty to go further
    than this, even though it may be at the risk of your
    displeasure. I presume from what you tell me that you are
    contemplating a marriage between George Hotspur and your
    daughter; and I now repeat to you, in the most solemn
    words that I can use, my assurance that the marriage is
    one which you should not countenance. Captain Hotspur is
    not fit to marry your daughter.
 
 
 When Sir Harry had read so far he had become very angry, but his
 anger was now directed against his lawyer. Had he not told Mr. Boltby
 that he had changed his mind; and what business had the lawyer to
 interfere with him further? But he read the letter on to its bitter
 end:--
 
 
    Since you were in London the following facts have become
    known to me. On the second of last month Mr. George
    Hotspur met two men, named Walker and Bullbean, in the
    lodgings of the former, at about nine in the evening,
    and remained there during the greater part of the night,
    playing cards. Bullbean is a man well known to the police
    as a card-sharper. He once moved in the world as a
    gentleman. His trade is now to tout and find prey for
    gamblers. Walker is a young man in a low rank of life, who
    had some money. George Hotspur on that night won between
    three and four hundred pounds of Walker's money; and
    Bullbean, over and above this, got for himself some
    considerable amount of plunder. Walker is now prepared,
    and very urgent, to bring the circumstances of this case
    before a magistrate, having found out, or been informed,
    that some practice of cheating was used against him; and
    Bullbean is ready to give evidence as to George Hotspur's
    foul play. They have hitherto been restrained by Hart, the
    Jew whom you met. Hart fears that were the whole thing
    made public, his bills would not be taken up by you.
 
    I think that I know all this to be true. If you conceive
    that I am acting in a manner inimical to your family, you
    had better come up to London and put yourself into the
    hands of some other lawyer. If you can still trust me, I
    will do the best I can for you. I should recommend you to
    bring Captain Hotspur with you,--if he will come.
 
    I grieve to write as I have done, but it seems to me that
    no sacrifice is too great to make with the object of
    averting the fate to which, as I fear, Miss Hotspur is
    bringing herself.--My dear Sir Harry Hotspur, I am, very
    faithfully yours,
 
    JOHN BOLTBY.
 
 
 It was a terrible letter! Gradually, as he read it and re-read it,
 there came upon Sir Harry the feeling that he might owe, that he did
 owe, that he certainly would owe to Mr. Boltby a very heavy debt
 of gratitude. Gradually the thin glazing of hope with which he had
 managed to daub over and partly to hide his own settled convictions
 as to his cousin's character fell away, and he saw the man as he had
 seen him during his interview with Captain Stubber and Mr. Hart. It
 must be so. Let the consequences be what they might, his daughter
 must be told. Were she to be killed by the telling, it would be
 better than that she should be handed over to such a man as this. The
 misfortune which had come upon them might be the death of him and of
 her;--but better that than the other. He sat in his chair till the
 gong sounded through the house for prayers; then he rang his bell
 and sent in word to Lady Elizabeth that she should read them in
 his absence. When they were over, word was brought that he would
 breakfast alone, in his own room.