 Her father had known well enough that her
 family pride was equal to his own. Was it not natural that, when a
 man so endowed had come in her way, she should learn to love him? And
 when she had loved him, was it not right that she should cling to her
 love?
 
 Her father would fain treat her like a beast of burden kept in the
 stables for a purpose; or like a dog whose obedience and affections
 might be transferred from one master to another for a price. She
 would obey her father; but her father should be made to understand
 that hers was not the nature of a beast of burden or of a dog. She
 was a Hotspur as thoroughly as was he. And then they brought men
 there to her, selected suitors, whom she despised. What did they
 think of her when imagining that she would take a husband not of
 her own choosing? What must be their idea of love, and of marriage
 duty, and of that close intercourse of man and wife? To her feeling
 a woman should not marry at all unless she could so love a man as
 to acknowledge to herself that she was imperatively required to
 sacrifice all that belonged to her for his welfare and good. Such was
 her love for George Hotspur,--let him be what he might. They told
 her that he was bad and that he would drag her into the mud. She was
 willing to be dragged into the mud; or, at any rate, to make her own
 struggle during the dragging, as to whether he should drag her in, or
 she should drag him out.
 
 And then they brought men to her--walking-sticks,--Lord Alfred and
 young Mr. Thoresby, and insulted her by supposing of her that she
 would marry a man simply because he was brought there as a fitting
 husband. She would be dutiful and obedient as a daughter, according
 to her idea of duty and of principle; but she would let them know
 that she had an identity of her own, and that she was not to be
 moulded like a piece of clay.
 
 No doubt she was hard upon her father. No doubt she was in very
 truth disobedient and disrespectful. It was not that she should have
 married any Lord Alfred that was brought to her, but that she should
 have struggled to accommodate her spirit to her father's spirit.
 But she was a Hotspur; and though she could be generous, she could
 not yield. And then the hold of a child upon the father is so much
 stronger than that of the father on the child! Our eyes are set in
 our face, and are always turned forward. The glances that we cast
 back are but occasional.
 
 And so the sunshine was banished from the house of Humblethwaite, and
 the days were as black as the night.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XVII.
 
 "LET US TRY."
 
 
 Things went on thus at Humblethwaite for three weeks, and Sir Harry
 began to feel that he could endure it no longer. He had expected to
 have heard again from Mr. Boltby, but no letter had come. Mr. Boltby
 had suggested to him something of starving out the town, and he had
 expected to be informed before this whether the town were starved
 out or not. He had received an indignant and grandiloquent letter
 from his cousin, of which as yet he had taken no notice. He had taken
 no notice of the letter, although it had been written to decline a
 proposal of very great moment made by himself. He felt that in these
 circumstances Mr. Boltby ought to have written to him. He ought to
 have been told what was being done. And yet he had left Mr. Boltby
 with a feeling which made it distasteful to him to ask further
 questions from the lawyer on the subject. Altogether his position was
 one as disagreeable and painful as it well could be.
 
 But at last, in regard to his own private life with his daughter, he
 could bear it no longer. The tenderness of his heart was too much for
 his pride, and he broke down in his resolution to be stern and silent
 with her till all this should have passed by them. She was so much
 more to him than he was to her! She was his all in all;--whereas
 Cousin George was hers. He was the happier at any rate in this, that
 he would never be forced to despise where he loved.
 
 "Emily," he said to her at last, "why is it that you are so changed
 to me?"
 
 "Papa!"
 
 "Are you not changed? Do you not know that everything about the house
 is changed?"
 
 "Yes, Papa."
 
 "And why is it so? I do not keep away from you. You used to come to
 me every day. You never come near me now."
 
 She hesitated for a moment with her eyes turned to the ground, and
 then as she answered him she looked him full in the face. "It is
 because I am always thinking of my cousin George."
 
 "But why should that keep us apart, Emily? I wish that it were not
 so; but why should that keep us apart?"
 
 "Because you are thinking of him too, and think so differently! You
 hate him; but I love him."
 
 "I do not hate him. It is not that I hate him. I hate his vices."
 
 "So do I."
 
 "I know that he is not a fit man for you to marry. I have not been
 able to tell you the things that I know of him."
 
 "I do not wish to be told."
 
 "But you might believe me when I assure you that they are of a nature
 to make you change your feelings towards him. At this very moment he
 is attached to--to--another person."
 
 Emily Hotspur blushed up to her brows, and her cheeks and forehead
 were suffused with blood; but her mouth was set as firm as a rock,
 and then came that curl over her eye which her father had so dearly
 loved when she was a child, but which was now held by him to be so
 dangerous. She was not going to be talked out of her love in that
 way. Of course there had been things,--were things of which she knew
 nothing and desired to know nothing. Though she herself was as pure
 as the driven snow, she did not require to be told that there were
 impurities in the world. If it was meant to be insinuated that he was
 untrue to her, she simply disbelieved it. But what if he were? His
 untruth would not justify hers. And untruth was impossible to her.
 She loved him, and had told him so. Let him be ever so false, it
 was for her to bring him back to truth or to spend herself in the
 endeavour. Her father did not understand her at all when he talked to
 her after this fashion. But she said nothing. Her father was alluding
 to a matter on which she could say nothing.
 
 "If I could explain to you the way in which he has raised money for
 his daily needs, you would feel that he had degraded himself beneath
 your notice."
 
 "He cannot degrade himself beneath my notice;--not now. It is too
 late."
 
 "But, Emily,--do you mean to say then that, let you set your
 affections where you might,--however wrongly, on however base a
 subject,--your mamma and I ought to yield to them, merely because
 they are so set?"
 
 "He is your heir, Papa."
 
 "No; you are my heir. But I will not argue upon that. Grant that he
 were my heir; even though every acre that is mine must go to feed his
 wickedness the very moment that I die, would that be a reason for
 giving my child to him also? Do you think that you are no more to
 me than the acres, or the house, or the empty title? They are all
 nothing to my love for you."
 
 "Papa!"
 
 "I do not think that you have known it. Nay, darling, I have hardly
 known it myself. All other anxieties have ceased with me now that
 I have come to know what it really is to be anxious for you. Do you
 think that I would not abandon any consideration as to wealth or
 family for your happiness? It has come to that with me, Emily, that
 they are nothing to me now;--nothing. You are everything."
 
 "Dear Papa!" And now once again she leant upon his shoulder.
 
 "When I tell you of the young man's life, you will not listen to me.
 You regard it simply as groundless opposition."
 
 "No, Papa; not groundless,--only useless."
 
 "But am I not bound to see that my girl be not united to a man who
 would disgrace her, misuse her, drag her into the dirt,"--that idea
 of dragging George out was strong in Emily's mind as she listened to
 this,--"make her wretched and contemptible, and degrade her? Surely
 this is a father's duty; and my child should not turn from me, and
 almost refuse to speak to me, because I do it as best I can!"
 
 "I do not turn from you, Papa."
 
 "Has my darling been to me as she used to be?"
 
 "Look here, Papa; you know what it is I have promised you."
 
 "I do, dearest."
 
 "I will keep my promise. I will never marry him till you consent.
 Even though I were to see him every day for ten years, I would not do
 so when I had given my word."
 
 "I am sure of it, Emily."
 
 "But let us try, you and I and Mamma together. If you will do that;
 oh, I will be so good to you! Let us see if we cannot make him good.
 I will never ask to marry him till you yourself are satisfied that
 he has reformed." She looked into his face imploringly, and she saw
 that he was vacillating. And yet he was a strong man, not given in
 ordinary things to much doubt. "Papa, let us understand each other
 and be friends. If we do not trust each other, who can trust any
 one?"
 
 "I do trust you."
 
 "I shall never care for any one else."
 
 "Do not say that, my child. You are too young to know your own heart.
 These are wounds which time will cure. Others have suffered as you
 are suffering, and yet have become happy wives and mothers."
 
 "Papa, I shall never change. I think I love him more because he
 is--so weak. Like a poor child that is a cripple, he wants more
 love than those who are strong. I shall never change. And look here,
 Papa; I know it is my duty to obey you by not marrying without your
 consent. But it can never be my duty to marry any one because you or
 Mamma ask me. You will agree to that, Papa?"
 
 "I should never think of pressing any one on you."
 
 "That is what I mean. And so we do understand each other. Nothing
 can teach me not to think of him, and to love him, and to pray for
 him. As long as I live I shall do so. Nothing you can find out about
 him will alter me in that. Pray, pray do not go on finding out bad
 things. Find out something good, and then you will begin to love
 him."
 
 "But if there is nothing good?" Sir Harry, as he said this,
 remembered the indignant refusal of his offer which was at that
 moment in his pocket, and confessed to himself that he had no right
 to say that nothing good could be found in Cousin George.
 
 "Do not say that, Papa. How can you say that of any one? Remember, he
 has our name, and he must some day be at the head of our family."
 
 "It will not be long, first," said Sir Harry, mournfully.
 
 "Many, many, many years, I hope. For his sake as well as ours, I pray
 that it may be so. But still it is natural to suppose that the day
 will come."
 
 "Of course it will come."
 
 "Must it not be right, then, to make him fit for it when it comes? It
 can't be your great duty to think of him, as it is mine; but still it
 must be a duty to you too. I will not excuse his life, Papa; but have
 there not been temptations,--such great temptations? And then, other
 men are excused for doing what he has done. Let us try together,
 Papa. Say that you will try."
 
 It was clear to Sir Harry through it all that she knew nothing as yet
 of the nature of the man's offences. When she spoke of temptation not
 resisted, she was still thinking of commonplace extravagance, of the
 ordinary pleasures of fast young men, of racecourses, and betting,
 perhaps, and of tailors' bills. That lie which he had told about
 Goodwood she had, as it were, thrown behind her, so that she should
 not be forced to look at it. But Sir Harry knew him to be steeped
 in dirty lies up to the hip, one who cheated tradesmen on system,
 a gambler who looked out for victims, a creature so mean that he
 could take a woman's money! Mr. Boltby had called him a swindler, a
 card-sharper, and a cur; and Sir Harry, though he was inclined at
 the present moment to be angry with Mr. Boltby, had never known the
 lawyer to be wrong. And this was the man for whom his daughter was
 pleading with all the young enthusiasm of her nature,--was pleading,
 not as for a cousin, but in order that he might at last be welcomed
 to that house as her lover, her husband, the one human being chosen
 out from all the world to be the recipient of the good things of
 which she had the bestowal! The man was so foul in the estimation of
 Sir Harry that it was a stain to be in his presence; and this was the
 man whom he as a father was implored to help to save, in order that
 at some future time his daughter might become the reprobate's wife!
 
 "Papa, say that you will help me," repeated Emily, clinging to him,
 and looking up into his face.
 
 He could not say that he would help her, and yet he longed to say
 some word that might comfort her. "You have been greatly shaken by
 all this, dearest."
 
 "Shaken! Yes, in one sense I have been shaken. I don't know quite
 what you mean. I shall never be shaken in the other way."
 
 "You have been distressed."
 
 "Yes; distressed."
 
 "And, indeed, so have we all," he continued. "I think it will be best
 to leave this for a while."
 
 "For how long, Papa?"
 
 "We need not quite fix that. I was thinking of going to Naples for
 the winter." He was silent, waiting for her approbation, but she
 expressed none. "It is not long since you said how much you would
 like to spend a winter in Naples."
 
 She still paused, but it was but for a moment. "At that time, Papa,
 I was not engaged." Did she mean to tell him, that because of this
 fatal promise which she had made, she never meant to stir from
 her home till she should be allowed to go with that wretch as
 her husband; that because of this promise, which could never be
 fulfilled, everything should come to an end with her? "Papa," she
 said, "that would not be the way to try to save him, to go away and
 leave him among those who prey upon him;--unless, indeed, he might go
 too!"
 
 "What! with us?"
 
 "With you and Mamma. Why not? You know what I have promised. You can
 trust me."
 
 "It is a thing absolutely not to be thought of," he said; and then he
 left her. What was he to do? He could take her abroad, no doubt, but
 were he to do so in her present humour, she would, of course, relapse
 into that cold, silent, unloving, undutiful obedience which had been
 so distressing to him. She had made a great request to him, and he
 had not absolutely refused it. But the more he thought of it the more
 distasteful did it become to him. You cannot touch pitch and not be
 defiled. And the stain of this pitch was so very black! He could pay
 money, if that would soothe her. He could pay money, even if the man
 should not accept the offer made to him, should she demand it of him.
 And if the man would reform himself, and come out through the fire
 really purified, might it not be possible that at some long future
 time Emily should become his wife? Or, if some sort of half promise
 such as this were made to Emily, would not that soften her for
 the time, and induce her to go abroad with a spirit capable of
 satisfaction, if not of pleasure? If this could be brought about,
 then time might do the rest. It would have been a delight to him to
 see his daughter married early, even though his own home might have
 been made desolate; but now he would be content if he thought he
 could look forward to some future settlement in life that might
 become her rank and fortune.
 
 Emily, when her father left her, was aware that she had received
 no reply to her request, which she was entitled to regard as
 encouraging; but she thought that she had broken the ice, and that
 her father would by degrees become accustomed to her plan. If she
 could only get him to say that he would watch over the unhappy one,
 she herself would not be unhappy. It was not to be expected that she
 should be allowed to give her own aid at first to the work, but she
 had her scheme. His debts must be paid, and an income provided for
 him. And duties, too, must be given to him. Why should he not live
 at Scarrowby, and manage the property there? And then, at length, he
 would be welcomed to Humblethwaite, when her own work might begin.
 Neither for him nor for her must there be any living again in London
 until this task should have been completed. That any trouble could be
 too great, any outlay of money too vast for so divine a purpose, did
 not occur to her. Was not this man the heir to her father's title;
 and was he not the owner of her own heart? Then she knelt down and
 prayed that the Almighty Father would accomplish this good work for
 her;--and yet, not for her, but for him; not that she might be happy
 in her love, but that he might be as a brand saved from the burning,
 not only hereafter, but here also, in the sight of men. Alas,
 dearest, no; not so could it be done! Not at thy instance, though thy
 prayers be as pure as the songs of angels;--but certainly at his, if
 only he could be taught to know that the treasure so desirable in thy
 sight, so inestimable to thee, were a boon worthy of his acceptance.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XVIII.
 
 GOOD ADVICE.
 
 
 Two or three days after the little request made by Cousin George to
 Mrs. Morton, the Altringhams came suddenly to town. George received a
 note from Lady Altringham addressed to him at his club.
 
 
    We are going through to the Draytons in Hampshire. It
    is a new freak. Four or five horses are to be sold, and
    Gustavus thinks of buying the lot. If you are in town,
    come to us. You must not think that we are slack about you
    because Gustavus would have nothing to do with the money.
    He will be at home to-morrow till eleven. I shall not go
    out till two. We leave on Thursday.--Yours, A. A.
 
 
 This letter he received on the Wednesday. Up to that hour he had done
 nothing since his interview with Mr. Hart; nor during those few days
 did he hear from that gentleman, or from Captain Stubber, or from Mr.
 Boltby. He had written to Sir Harry refusing Sir Harry's generous
 offer, and subsequently to that had made up his mind to accept
 it,--and had asked, as the reader knows, for Mrs. Morton's
 assistance. But the making up of George Hotspur's mind was nothing.
 It was unmade again that day after dinner, as he thought of all the
 glories of Humblethwaite and Scarrowby combined. Any one knowing
 him would have been sure that he would do nothing till he should be
 further driven. Now there had come upon the scene in London one who
 could drive him.
 
 He went to the Earl's house just at eleven, not wishing to seem to
 avoid the Earl, but still desirous of seeing as little of his friend
 on that occasion as possible. He found Lord Altringham standing in
 his wife's morning-room. "How are you, old fellow? How do things go
 with the heiress?" He was in excellent humour, and said nothing about
 the refused request. "I must be off. You do what my Lady advises; you
 may be sure that she knows a deal more about it than you or I." Then
 he went, wishing George success in his usual friendly, genial way,
 which, as George knew, meant very little.
 
 With Lady Altringham the case was different. She was in earnest about
 it. It was to her a matter of real moment that this great heiress
 should marry one of her own set, and a man who wanted money so
 badly as did poor George. And she liked work of that kind. George's
 matrimonial prospects were more interesting to her than her husband's
 stables. She was very soon in the thick of it all, asking questions,
 and finding out how the land lay. She knew that George would lie; but
 that was to be expected from a man in his position. She knew also
 that she could with fair accuracy extract the truth from his lies.
 
 "Pay all your debts, and give you five hundred pounds a year for his
 life."
 
 "The lawyer has offered that," said George, sadly.
 
 "Then you may be sure," continued Lady Altringham, "that the young
 lady is in earnest. You have not accepted it?"
 
 "Oh dear, no. I wrote to Sir Harry quite angrily. I told him I wanted
 my cousin's hand."
 
 "And what next?"
 
 "I have heard nothing further from anybody."
 
 Lady Altringham sat and thought. "Are these people in London
 bothering you?" George explained that he had been bothered a good
 deal, but not for the last four or five days. "Can they put you in
 prison, or anything of that kind?"
 
 George was not quite sure whether they might or might not have some
 such power. He had a dreadful weight on his mind of which he could
 say nothing to Lady Altringham. Even she would be repelled from
 him were she to know of that evening's work between him and Messrs.
 Walker and Bullbean. He said at last that he did not think they could
 arrest him, but that he was not quite sure.
 
 "You must do something to let her know that you are as much in
 earnest as she is."
 
 "Exactly."
 
 "It is no use writing, because she wouldn't get your letters."
 
 "She wouldn't have a chance."
 
 "And if I understand her she would not do anything secretly."
 
 "I am afraid not," said George.
 
 "You will live, perhaps, to be glad that it is so. When girls
 come out to meet their lovers clandestinely before marriage, they
 get so fond of the excitement that they sometimes go on doing it
 afterwards."
 
 "She is as,--as--as sure to go the right side of the post as any girl
 in the world."
 
 "No doubt. So much the better for you. When those girls do catch the
 disease, they always have it very badly. They mean only to have one
 affair, and naturally want to make the most of it. Well, now what I
 would do is this. Run down to Humblethwaite."
 
 "To Humblethwaite!"
 
 "Yes. I don't suppose you are going to be afraid of anybody. Knock
 at the door, and send your card to Sir Harry. Drive into the
 stable-yard, so that everybody about the place may know that you are
 there, and then ask to see the Baronet."
 
 "He wouldn't see me."
 
 "Then ask to see Lady Elizabeth."
 
 "She wouldn't be allowed to see me."
 
 "Then leave a letter, and say that you'll wait for an answer. Write
 to Miss Hotspur whatever you like to say in the way of a love-letter,
 and put it under cover to Sir Harry--open."
 
 "She'll never get it."
 
 "I don't suppose she will. Not but what she may--only that isn't the
 first object. But this will come of it. She'll know that you've been
 there. That can't be kept from her. You may be sure that she was very
 firm in sticking to you when he offered to pay all that money to get
 rid of you. She'll remain firm if she's made to know that you are the
 same. Don't let her love die out for want of notice."
 
 "I won't."
 
 "If they take her abroad, go after them. Stick to it, and you'll wear
 them out if she helps you. And if she knows that you are sticking to
 it, she'll do the same for honour. When she begins to be a little
 pale, and to walk out at nights, and to cough in the morning, they'll
 be tired out and send for Dr. George Hotspur. That's the way it will
 go if you play your game well."
 
 Cousin George was lost in admiration at the wisdom and generalship of
 this great counsellor, and promised implicit obedience. The Countess
 went on to explain that it might be expedient to postpone this
 movement for a week or two. "You should leave just a little interval,
 because you cannot always be doing something. For some days after his
 return her father won't cease to abuse you, which will keep you well
 in her mind. When those men begin to attack you again, so as to make
 London too hot, then run down to Humblethwaite. Don't hide your light
 under a bushel. Let the people down there know all about it."
 
 George Hotspur swore eternal gratitude and implicit obedience, and
 went back to his club.
 
 Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber did not give him much rest. From Mr.
 Boltby he received no further communication. For the present Mr.
 Boltby thought it well to leave him in the hands of Mr. Hart and
 Captain Stubber. Mr. Boltby, indeed, did not as yet know of Mr.
 Bullbean's story, although certain hints had reached him which had,
 as he thought, justified him in adding the title of card-sharper to
 those other titles with which he had decorated his client's cousin's
 name. Had he known the entire Walker story, he would probably have
 thought that Cousin George might have been bought at a considerably
 cheaper price than that fixed in the Baronet's offer, which was
 still in force. But then Mr. Hart had his little doubts also and his
 difficulties. He, too, could perceive that were he to make this last
 little work of Captain Hotspur's common property in the market, it
 might so far sink Captain Hotspur's condition and value in the world
 that nobody would think it worth his while to pay Captain Hotspur's
 debts. At present there was a proposition from an old gentleman,
 possessed of enormous wealth, to "pay all Captain Hotspur's debts."
 Three months ago, Mr. Hart would willingly have sold every scrap
 of the Captain's paper in his possession for the half of the
 sum inscribed on it. The whole sum was now promised, and would
 undoubtedly be paid if the Captain could be worked upon to do as
 Mr. Boltby desired. But if the gentlemen employed on this delicate
 business were to blow upon the Captain too severely, Mr. Boltby would
 have no such absolute necessity to purchase the Captain. The Captain
 would sink to zero, and not need purchasing. Mr. Walker must have
 back his money,--or so much of it as Mr. Hart might permit him
 to take. That probably might be managed; and the Captain must be
 thoroughly frightened, and must be made to write the letter which Mr.
 Boltby desired. Mr. Hart understood his work very well;--so, it is
 hoped, does the reader.
 
 Captain Stubber was in these days a thorn in our hero's side; but Mr.
 Hart was a scourge of scorpions. Mr. Hart never ceased to talk of Mr.
 Walker, and of the determination of Walker and Bullbean to go before
 a magistrate if restitution were not made. Cousin George of course
 denied the foul play, but admitted that he would repay the money if
 he had it. There should be no difficulty about the money, Mr. Hart
 assured him, if he would only write that letter to Mr. Boltby. In
 fact, if he would write that letter to Mr. Boltby, he should be made
 "shquare all round." So Mr. Hart was pleased to express himself. But
 if this were not done, and done at once, Mr. Hart swore by his God
 that Captain "'Oshspur" should be sold up, root and branch, without
 another day's mercy. The choice was between five hundred pounds a
 year in any of the capitals of Europe, and that without a debt,--or
 penal servitude. That was the pleasant form in which Mr. Hart put the
 matter to his young friend.
 
 Cousin George drank a good deal of curaçoa, and doubted between Lady
 Altringham and Mr. Hart. He knew that he had not told everything to
 the Countess. Excellent as was her scheme, perfect as was her wisdom,
 her advice was so far more dangerous than the Jew's, that it was
 given somewhat in the dark. The Jew knew pretty well everything. The
 Jew was interested, of course, and therefore his advice must also be
 regarded with suspicion. At last, when Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber
 between them had made London too hot to hold him, he started for
 Humblethwaite,--not without leaving a note for "dear Mr. Hart,"
 in which he explained to that gentleman that he was going to
 Westmoreland suddenly, with a purpose that would, he trusted, very
 speedily enable him to pay every shilling that he owed.
 
 "Yesh," said Mr. Hart, "and if he ain't quick he shall come back with
 a 'andcuff on."
 
 Captain Hotspur could not very well escape Mr. Hart. He started by
 the night-train for Penrith, and before doing so prepared a short
 letter for Miss Hotspur, which, as instructed, he put open under
 an envelope addressed to the Baronet. There should be nothing
 clandestine, nothing dishonourable. Oh dear, no! He quite taught
 himself to believe that he would have hated anything dishonourable or
 clandestine. His letter was as follows:--
 
 
    DEAREST EMILY,--After what has passed between us, I cannot
    bear not to attempt to see you or to write to you. So
    I shall go down and take this letter with me. Of course
    I shall not take any steps of which Sir Harry might
    disapprove. I wrote to him two or three weeks ago, telling
    him what I proposed, and I thought that he would have
    answered me. As I have not heard from him I shall take
    this with me to Humblethwaite, and shall hope, though I do
    not know whether I may dare to expect, to see the girl I
    love better than all the world.--Always your own,
 
    GEORGE HOTSPUR.
 
 
 Even this was not composed by himself, for Cousin George, though
 he could often talk well,--or at least sufficiently well for the
 purposes which he had on hand,--was not good with his pen on such an
 occasion as this. Lady Altringham had sent him by post a rough copy
 of what he had better say, and he had copied her ladyship's words
 verbatim. There is no matter of doubt at all but that on all such
 subjects an average woman can write a better letter than an average
 man; and Cousin George was therefore right to obtain assistance from
 his female friends.
 
 He slept at Penrith till nearly noon, then breakfasted and started
 with post-horses for Humblethwaite. He felt that everybody knew what
 he was about, and was almost ashamed of being seen. Nevertheless he
 obeyed his instructions. He had himself driven up through the lodges
 and across the park into the large stable-yard of the Hall. Lady
 Altringham had quite understood that more people must see and hear
 him in this way than if he merely rang at the front door and were
 from thence dismissed. The grooms and the coachman saw him, as did
 also three or four of the maids who were in the habit of watching to
 see that the grooms and coachman did their work. He had brought with
 him a travelling-bag,--not expecting to be asked to stay and dine,
 but thinking it well to be prepared. This, however, he left in the
 fly as he walked round to the hall-door. The footman was already
 there when he appeared, as word had gone through the house that
 Mr. George had arrived. Was Sir Harry at home? Yes, Sir Harry was
 at home;--and then George found himself in a small parlour, or
 book-room, or subsidiary library, which he had very rarely known to
 be used. But there was a fire in the room, and he stood before it,
 twiddling his hat.
 
 In a quarter of an hour the door was opened, and the servant came
 in with a tray and wine and sandwiches. George felt it to be an
 inappropriate welcome; but still, after a fashion, it was a welcome.
 
 "Is Sir Harry in the house?" he asked.
 
 "Yes, Mr. Hotspur."
 
 "Does he know that I am here?"
 
 "Yes, Mr. Hotspur, I think he does."
 
 Then it occurred to Cousin George that perhaps he might bribe the
 servant; and he put his hand into his pocket. But before he had
 communicated the two half-crowns, it struck him that there was no
 possible request which he could make to the man in reference to which
 a bribe would be serviceable.
 
 "Just ask them to look to the horses," he said; "I don't know whether
 they were taken out."
 
 "The horses is feeding, Mr. Hotspur," said the man.
 
 Every word the man spoke was gravely spoken, and George understood
 perfectly that he was held to have done a very wicked thing in coming
 to Humblethwaite. Nevertheless, there was a decanter full of sherry,
 which, as far as it went, was an emblem of kindness. Nobody should
 say that he was unwilling to accept kindness at his cousin's hands,
 and he helped himself liberally. Before he was interrupted again he
 had filled his glass four times.
 
 But in truth it needed something to support him. For a whole hour
 after the servant's disappearance he was left alone. There were books
 in the room,--hundreds of them; but in such circumstances who could
 read? Certainly not Cousin George, to whom books at no time gave much
 comfort. Twice and thrice he stepped towards the bell, intending to
 ring it, and ask again for Sir Harry; but twice and thrice he paused.
 In his position he was bound not to give offence to Sir Harry. At
 last the door was opened, and with silent step, and grave demeanour,
 and solemn countenance, Lady Elizabeth walked into the room. "We are
 very sorry that you should have been kept so long waiting, Captain
 Hotspur," she said.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XIX.
 
 THE NEW SMITHY.
 
 
 Sir Harry was sitting alone in the library when the tidings were
 brought to him that George Hotspur had reached Humblethwaite with
 a pair of post-horses from Penrith. The old butler, Cloudesdale,
 brought him the news, and Cloudesdale whispered it into his ears with
 solemn sorrow. Cloudesdale was well aware that Cousin George was no
 credit to the house of Humblethwaite. And much about the same time
 the information was brought to Lady Elizabeth by her housekeeper, and
 to Emily by her own maid. It was by Cloudesdale's orders that George
 was shown into the small room near the hall; and he told Sir Harry
 what he had done in a funereal whisper. Lady Altringham had been
 quite right in her method of ensuring the general delivery of the
 information about the house.
 
 Emily flew at once to her mother. "George is here," she said. Mrs.
 Quick, the housekeeper, was at that moment leaving the room.
 
 "So Quick tells me. What can have brought him, my dear?"
 
 "Why should he not come, Mamma?"
 
 "Because your papa will not make him welcome to the house. Oh,
 dear,--he knows that. What are we to do?" In a few minutes Mrs. Quick
 came back again. Sir Harry would be much obliged if her ladyship
 would go to him. Then it was that the sandwiches and sherry were
 ordered. It was a compromise on the part of Lady Elizabeth between
 Emily's prayer that some welcome might be shown, and Sir Harry's
 presumed determination that the banished man should continue to be
 regarded as banished. "Take him some kind of refreshment, Quick;--a
 glass of wine or something, you know." Then Mrs. Quick had cut the
 sandwiches with her own hand, and Cloudesdale had given the sherry.
 "He ain't eaten much, but he's made it up with the wine," said
 Cloudesdale, when the tray was brought back again.
 
 Lady Elizabeth went down to her husband, and there was a
 consultation. Sir Harry was quite clear that he would not now, on
 this day, admit Cousin George as a guest into his house; nor would he
 see him. To that conclusion he came after his wife had been with him
 some time. He would not see him, there, at Humblethwaite. If George
 had anything to say that could not be said in a letter, a meeting
 might be arranged elsewhere. Sir Harry confessed, however, that
 he could not see that good results could come from any meeting
 whatsoever. "The truth is, that I don't want to have anything more to
 do with him," said Sir Harry. That was all very well, but as Emily's
 wants in this respect were at variance with her father's, there was
 a difficulty. Lady Elizabeth pleaded that some kind of civility, at
 least some mitigation of opposition, should be shown, for Emily's
 sake. At last she was commissioned to go to Cousin George, to send
 him away from the house, and, if necessary, to make an appointment
 between him and Sir Harry at the Crown, at Penrith, for the morrow.
 Nothing on earth should induce Sir Harry to see his cousin anywhere
 on his own premises. As for any meeting between Cousin George and
 Emily, that was, of course, out of the question,--and he must go from
 Humblethwaite. Such were the instructions with which Lady Elizabeth
 descended to the little room.
 
 Cousin George came forward with the pleasantest smile to take Lady
 Elizabeth by the hand. He was considerably relieved when he saw Lady
 Elizabeth, because of her he was not afraid. "I do not at all mind
 waiting," he said. "How is Sir Harry?"
 
 "Quite well."
 
 "And yourself?"
 
 "Pretty well, thank you."
 
 "And Emily?"
 
 Lady Elizabeth knew that in answering him she ought to call her own
 daughter Miss Hotspur, but she lacked the courage. "Emily is well
 too. Sir Harry has thought it best that I should come to you and
 explain that just at present he cannot ask you to Humblethwaite."
 
 "I did not expect it."
 
 "And he had rather not see you himself,--at least not here." Lady
 Elizabeth had not been instructed to propose a meeting. She had
 been told rather to avoid it if possible. But, like some other
 undiplomatic ambassadors, in her desire to be civil, she ran at once
 to the extremity of the permitted concessions. "If you have anything
 to say to Sir Harry--"
 
 "I have, Lady Elizabeth; a great deal."
 
 "And if you could write it--"
 
 "I am so bad at writing."
 
 "Then Sir Harry will go over and see you to-morrow at Penrith."
 
 "That will be so very troublesome to him!"
 
 "You need not regard that. At what hour shall he come?"
 
 Cousin George was profuse in declaring that he would be at his
 cousin's disposal at any hour Sir Harry might select, from six in the
 morning throughout the day and night. But might he not say a word to
 Emily? At this proposition Lady Elizabeth shook her head vigorously.
 It was quite out of the question. Circumstanced as they all were at
 present, Sir Harry would not think of such a thing. And then it would
 do no good. Lady Elizabeth did not believe that Emily herself would
 wish it. At any rate there need be no further talk about it, as
 any such interview was at present quite impossible. By all which
 arguments and refusals, and the tone in which they were pronounced,
 Cousin George was taught to perceive that, at any rate in the mind
 of Lady Elizabeth, the process of parental yielding had already
 commenced.
 
 On all such occasions interviews are bad. The teller of this story
 ventures to take the opportunity of recommending parents in such
 cases always to refuse interviews, not only between the young lady
 and the lover who is to be excluded, but also between themselves and
 the lover. The vacillating tone,--even when the resolve to suppress
 vacillation has been most determined,--is perceived and understood,
 and at once utilized, by the least argumentative of lovers, even by
 lovers who are obtuse. The word "never" may be so pronounced as to
 make the young lady's twenty thousand pounds full present value for
 ten in the lover's pocket. There should be no arguments, no letters,
 no interviews; and the young lady's love should be starved by the
 absence of all other mention of the name, and by the imperturbable
 good humour on all other matters of those with whom she comes in
 contact in her own domestic circle. If it be worth anything, it won't
 be starved; but if starving to death be possible, that is the way to
 starve it. Lady Elizabeth was a bad ambassador; and Cousin George,
 when he took his leave, promising to be ready to meet Sir Harry at
 twelve on the morrow, could almost comfort himself with a prospect
 of success. He might be successful, if only he could stave off
 the Walker and Bullbean portion of Mr. Hart's persecution! For he
 understood that the success of his views at Humblethwaite must
 postpone the payment by Sir Harry of those moneys for which Mr. Hart
 and Captain Stubber were so unreasonably greedy. He would have dared
 to defy the greed, but for the Walker and Bullbean portion of the
 affair. Sir Harry already knew that he was in debt to these men;
 already knew with fair accuracy the amount of those debts. Hart and
 Stubber could not make him worse in Sir Harry's eyes than he was
 already, unless the Walker and Bullbean story should be told with the
 purpose of destroying him. How he did hate Walker and Bullbean and
 the memory of that evening;--and yet the money which now enabled him
 to drink champagne at the Penrith Crown was poor Mr. Walker's money!
 As he was driven back to Penrith he thought of all this, for some
 moments sadly, and at others almost with triumph. Might not a letter
 to Mr. Hart, with perhaps a word of truth in it, do some good? That
 evening, after his champagne, he wrote a letter:--
 
 
    DEAR MR. HART,--Things are going uncommon well here, only
    I hope you will do nothing to disturb just at present.
    It _must_ come off, if a little time is given, and then
    _every shilling_ will be paid. A few pounds more or less
    won't make any difference. Do arrange this, and you'll
    find I'll never forget how kind you have been. I've been
    at Humblethwaite to-day, and things are going quite
    smooth.
 
    Yours most sincerely,
 
    GEORGE HOTSPUR.
 
    Don't mention Walker's name, and everything shall be
    settled just as you shall fix.
 
    The Crown, Penrith, Thursday.
 
 
 The moment the letter was written he rang the bell and gave it to the
 waiter. Such was the valour of drink operating on him now, as it had
 done when he wrote that other letter to Sir Harry! The drink made him
 brave to write, and to make attempts, and to dare consequences; but
 even whilst brave with drink, he knew that the morning's prudence
 would refuse its assent to such courage; and therefore, to save
 himself from the effects of the morning's cowardice, he put the
 letter at once out of his own power of control. After this fashion
 were arranged most of Cousin George's affairs. Before dinner on
 that day the evening of which he had passed with Mr. Walker, he had
 resolved that certain hints given to him by Mr. Bullbean should be
 of no avail to him;--not to that had he yet descended, nor would he
 so descend;--but with his brandy after dinner divine courage had
 come, and success had attended the brave. As soon as he was awake on
 that morning after writing to Mr. Hart, he rang his bell to inquire
 whether that letter which he had given to the waiter at twelve
 o'clock last night were still in the house. It was too late. The
 letter in which so imprudent a mention had been made of Mr. Walker's
 name was already in the post. "Never mind," said Cousin George to
 himself; "None but the brave deserve the fair." Then he turned round
 for another nap. It was not much past nine, and Sir Harry would not
 be there before twelve.
 
 In the mean time there had been hope also and doubt also at
 Humblethwaite. Sir Harry was not surprised and hardly disappointed
 when he was told that he was to go to Penrith to see his cousin.
 The offer had been made by himself, and he was sure that he would
 not escape with less; and when Emily was told by her mother of the
 arrangement, she saw in it a way to the fulfilment of the prayer
 which she had made to her father. She would say nothing to him that
 evening, leaving to him the opportunity of speaking to her, should he
 choose to do so.