Had Lady Elizabeth known

how to speak, had she dared to be free with her own


39

child, Emily would soon have told her that there was

no chance for Lord Alfred. And Lady Elizabeth

would have believed her. Nay, Lady Elizabeth, though

she could not speak, had the woman's instinct, which

almost assured her that the match would never be

made. Sir Harry, on the other side, thought that

things went prosperously; and his wife did not dare to

undeceive him. He saw the young people together,

and thought that he saw that Emily was kind. He

did not know that this frank kindness was incompat-

ible with love in such a maiden's ways. As for Emily

herself, she knew that it must come. She knew that

she could not prevent it. A slight hint or two she

did give, or thought she gave, but they were too fine,

too impalpable to be of avail.

Lord Alfred spoke nothing of love till he, made

his offer in form. At last he was not hopeful himself.

He had found it impossible to speak to this girl of

love. She had been gracious with him, and almost

intimate, and yet it had been impossible. He thought

of himself that he was dull, stupid, lethargic, and

miserably undemonstrative. But the truth was that

there was nothing for him to demonstrate. He had

come there to do a stroke of business, and he could

not throw into this business a spark of that fire which

would have been kindled by such sympathy had it

existed. There are men who can raise such sparks,

the pretence of fire, where there is no heat at all;—.


40

false, fraudulent men; but he was not such an one.

Nevertheless he went on with his business.

“Miss Hotspur," he said to her one morning be-

tween breakfast and lunch, when, as usual, opportunity

had been given him to be alone with her, “I have

something to say to you, which I hope at any rate it

will not make you angry to hear.”

“I am sure you will say nothing to make me

angry,” she replied. .

“I have already spoken to your father, and I have

his permission. I may say more. He assures me that

he hopes I may succeed.” He paused a moment, but

she remained quite tranquil. He watched her, and

could see that the delicate pink on her cheek was a

little heightened, and that a streak of colour showed

itself on her fair brow; but there was nothing in her

manner to give him either promise of success or as-

surance of failure. “You will know what I mean?”

“Yes, I know;" she said, almost in a whisper.

“And may I hope? To say that I love you dearly

seems to be saying what must be a matter of course.”

“I do not see that at all,” she replied with spirit.

“I do love you very dearly. If I may be allowed

to think that you will be my wife, I shall be the hap-

piest man in England. I know how great is the

honour which I seek, how immense in every way is

the gift which I ask you to give me. Can you love

me?"


41

“No," she said, again dropping her voice to a

whisper.

“Is that all the answer, Miss Hotspur?”

“What should I say? How ought I to answer

you? If I could say it without seeming to be unkind,

indeed, indeed, I would do so.”

“Perhaps I have been abrupt.”

“It is not that. When you ask me--toto-

love you, of course I know what you mean. Should

I not speak the truth at once?”

“Must this be for always?”

“For-always,” she replied. And then it was over.

He did not himself press his suit further, though

he remained at Humblethwaite for three days after this

interview.

Before lunch on that day the story had been told

by Emily to her mother, and by Lord Alfred to Sir

Harry. Lady Elizabeth knew well enough that the

story would never have to be told in another way.

Sir Harry by no means so easily gave up his enter-

prise. He proposed to Lord Alfred that Emily should

be asked to reconsider her verdict. With his wife he

was very round, saying that an answer given so curtly

should go for nothing, and that the girl must be

taught her duty. With Emily herself he was less

urgent, less authoritative, and indeed at last somewhat

suppliant. He explained to her how excellent would

be the marriage; how it would settle this terrible re-

osed to Los casily gave chother way


42

sponsibility which now lay on his shoulders with so

heavy a weight; how glorious would be her position;

and how the Hotspurs would still live as a great

family could she bring herself to be obedient. And

he said very much in praise of Lord Alfred, pointing

out how good a man he was, how moral, how diligent,

how safe, how clever,-how sure, with the assistance

of the means which she would give him, to be one of

the notable men of the country. But she never yielded

an inch. She said very little,-answered him hardly

a word, standing close to him, holding by his arm

and his hand. There was the fact, that she would

not have the man, would not have the man now or

ever, certainly would not have him; and Sir Harry,

let him struggle as he might, and talk his best, could

not keep himself from giving absolute credit to her

assurance.

The visit was prolonged for three days, and then

Lord Alfred left Humblethwaite Hall, with less ap-

preciation of all its beauties than he had felt as he

was first being driven up to the Hall doors. When

he went, Sir Harry could only bid God bless him, and

assure him that, should he ever choose to try his for-

tune again, he should have all the aid which a father

could give him.

"It would be useless," said Lord Alfred; “she

knows her own mind too well.”

And so he went his way.


43

CHAPTER IV.

Vacillation.

WHEN the spring-time came, Sir Harry Hotspur,

with his wife and daughter, went up to London.

During the last season the house in Bruton Street

had been empty. He and his wife were then mourn-

ing their lost son, and there was no place for the

gaiety of London in their lives. Sir Harry was still

thinking of his great loss. He was always thinking

of the boy who was gone, who had been the apple of

his eye, his one great treasure, the only human being

in the world whose superior importance to his own he

had been ready, in his heart of hearts, to admit; but

it was needful that the outer signs of sorrow should

be laid aside, and Emily Hotspur was taken up to

London, in order that she might be suited with a

husband. That, in truth, was the reason of their

going. Neither Sir Harry nor Lady Elizabeth would

have cared to leave Cumberland had there been no

such cause. They would have been altogether content

to remain at home had Emily been obedient enough

in the winter to accept the hand of the suitor proposed

for her.

The house was opened in Bruton Street, and Lord


44

Alfred came to see them. So also did Cousin George.

There was no reason why Cousin George should not

come. Indeed, had he not done so, he must have

been the most ungracious of cousins. He came, and

found Lady Elizabeth and Emily at home. Emily

told him that they were always there to receive visi-

tors on Sundays after morning church, and then he

came again. She had made no such communication

to Lord Alfred, but then perhaps it would have been

hardly natural that she should have done so. Lady

Elizabeth, in a note which she had occasion to write

to Lord Alfred, did tell him of her custom on a

Sunday afternoon; but Lord Alfred took no such

immediate advantage of the offer as did Cousin

George.

As regarded the outward appearance of their life,

the Hotspurs were gayer this May than they had

been heretofore when living in London. There were

dinner-parties, whereas in previous times there had

only been dinners at which a few friends might join

them;—and there was to be a ball. There was a box

at the Opera, and there were horses for the Park, and

there was an understanding that the dealings with

Madame Milvodi, the milliner, were to be as unlimited

as the occasion demanded. It was perceived by

every one that Miss Hotspur was to be settled in life.

Not a few knew the story of Lord Alfred. Every

one knew the facts of the property and Emily's posi-


45

tion as heiress, though every one probably did not

know that it was still in Sir Harry's power to leave

every acre of the property to whom he pleased. Emily

understood it all herself. There lay upon her that

terrible responsibility of doing her best with the

Hotspur interests. To her the death of her brother

had at the time been the blackest of misfortunes, and

it was not the less so now as she thought of her own

position. She had been steady enough as to the

refusal of Lord Alfred, knowing well enough that she

cared nothing for him. But there had since come

upon her moments almost of regret that she should

have been unable to accept him. It would have been

so easy a way of escape from all her troubles without

the assistance of Madame Milvodi, and the opera-box,

and the Park horses! At the time she had her own

ideas about another man, but her ideas were not

such as to make her think that any further work with

Madame Milvodi and the opera-box would be un-'.

necessary.

Then came the question of asking Cousin George

to the house. He had already been told to come on

Sundays, and on the very next Sunday had been

there. He had given no cause of offence at Humble-

thwaite, and Lady Elizabeth was of opinion that he

should be asked to dinner. If he were not asked, the

very omission would show that they were afraid of

him. Lady Elizabeth did not exactly explain this


46

to her husband, did not accurately know that such

was her fear; but Sir Harry understood her feelings,

and yielded. Let Cousin George be asked to dinner.

Sir Harry at this time was vacillating with more of

weakness than would have been expected from a man

who had generally been so firm in the affairs of his

life. He had been quite clear about George Hotspur,

when those inquiries of his were first made, and when

his mind had first accepted the notion of Lord Alfred

as his chosen son-in-law. But now he was again at

sea. He was so conscious of the importance of his

daughter's case, that he could not bring himself to be

at ease, and to allow himself to expect that the girl

would, in the ordinary course of nature, dispose of her

young heart not to her own injury, as might reason-

ably be hoped from her temperament, her character,

and her education. He could not protect himself

from daily and hourly thought about it. Her mar-

riage was not as the marriage of other girls. The

house of Hotspur, which had lived and prospered for

so many centuries, was to live and prosper through her;

or rather mainly through the man whom she should

choose as her husband. The girl was all-important

now, but when she should have once disposed of her-

self her importance would be almost at an end. Sir

Harry had in the recess of his mind almost a convic-

tion that, although the thing was of such utmost

moment, it would be better for him, better for them


47

all, better for the Hotspurs, that the matter should

be allowed to arrange itself than that there should be

any special judgment used in selection. He almost

believed that his girl should be left to herself, as are

other girls. But the thing was of such moment that

he could not save himself from having it always before

his eyes.

And yet he knew not what to do; nor was there

any aid forthcoming from Lady Elizabeth. He had

tried his hand at the choice of a proper husband, and

his daughter would have none of the man so chosen.

So he had brought her up to London, and thrown her

as it were upon the market. Let Madame Milvodi

and the opera-box and the Park horses do what they

could for her. Of course a watch should be kept on

her;—not from doubt of her excellence, but because

the thing to be disposed of was so all-important, and

the girl's mode of disposing of it might, without dis-

grace or fault on her part, be so vitally prejudicial to

the family!

For, let it be remembered, no curled darling of an

eldest son would suit the exigencies of the case, un-

less such eldest son were willing altogether to merge

the claims of his own family, and to make himself

by name and purpose a Hotspur. Were his child

to present to him as his son-in-law some heir to a

noble house, some future earl, say even a duke in

embryo, all that would be as nothing to Sir Harry.


48

It was not his ambition to see his daughter a duchess.

He wanted no name, or place, or dominion for any

Hotspur greater or higher or more noble than those

which the Hotspurs claimed and could maintain for

themselves. To have Humblethwaite and Scarrowby

lost amidst the vast appanages and domains of some

titled family, whose gorgeous glories were new and

paltry in comparison with the mellow honours of his

own house, would to him have been a ruin to all his

hopes. There might, indeed, be some arrangement as

to the second son proceeding from such a marriage,

as to a future chance Hotspur; but the claims of the

Hotspurs were, he thought, too high and too holy for

such future chance; and in such case, for one genera-

tion at least, the Hotspurs would be in abeyance.

No: it was not that which he desired. That would

not suffice for him. The son-in-law that he desired

should be well born, a perfect gentleman, with belong-

ings of whom he and his child might be proud; but

he should be one who should be content to rest his

claims to material prosperity and personal position on

the name and wealth that he would obtain with his

wife. Lord Alfred had been the very man; but then

his girl would have none of Lord Alfred! Eldest

sons there might be in plenty ready to take such a

bride; and were some eldest son to come to him and

ask for his daughter's hand, some eldest son who

would do so almost with a right to claim it if the


49

girl's consent were gained, how could he refuse? And

yet to leave a Hotspur behind him living at Humble-

thwaite, and Hotspurs who should follow that Hotspur,

was all in all to him. .

Might he venture to think once again of Cousin

George? Cousin George was there, coming to the

house, and his wife was telling him that it was in-

cumbent on them to ask the young man to dinner.

It was incumbent on them, unless they meant to let

him know that he was to be regarded absolutely

as a stranger,—as one whom they had taken up for

a while, and now chose to drop again. A very ugly

story had reached Sir Harry's ears about Cousin

George. It was said that he had twice borrowed

money from the money-lenders on his commission,

· passing some document for security of its value

which was no security, and that he had barely escaped

detection, the two Jews knowing that the commission

would be forfeited altogether if the fraud were brought

to light. The commission had been sold, and the

proceeds divided between the Jews, with certain re-

maining claims to them on Cousin George's personal

estate. Such had been the story which in a vague

way had reached Sir Harry's ears. It is not easily

that such a man as Sir Harry can learn the details

of a disreputable cousin's life. Among all his old

friends he had none more dear to him than Lord

Milnthorp; and among his younger friends none more

Sir Harry Hotspur.


50

intimate than Lord Burton, the eldest son of Lord

Milnthorp, Lord Alfred's brother. Lord Burton had

told him the story, telling him at the same time that

he could not vouch for its truth. “Upon my word,

I don't know," said Lord Burton, when interrogated

again. "I think if I were you I would regard it as

though I had never heard it. Of course, he was in

debt."

“That is altogether another thing,” said Sir Harry.

“Altogether! I think that probably he did pawn

his commission. That is bad, but it isn't so very bad.

As for the other charge against him, I doubt it." So

said Lord Burton, and Sir Harry determined that the

accusation should go for nothing. .

: But his own child, his only child, the transmitter of

all the great things that fortune had given to him;

she, in whose hands were to tie the glories of Humble-

thwaite and Scarrowby; she, who had the giving away

of the honour of their ancient family,--could she be

trusted to one of whom it must be adinitted that all

his early life had been disreputable, even if the world's

lenient judgment in such matters should fail to stig-

matize it as dishonourable? In other respects, how-

ever, he was so manifestly the man to whom his

daughter ought to be given in marriage! By such

arrangement would the title and the property be kept

together,--and by no other which Sir Harry could

now make, for his word had been given to his daughter


51

that she was to be his heiress. Let him make what

arrangements he might, this Cousin George, at his

death, would be the head of the family. Every

"Peerage” that was printed would tell the old story

to all the world. By certain courtesies of the law of

descent his future héirs would be Hotspurs were his

daughter married to Lord Alfred or the like; but the

children of such a marriage would not be Hotspurs in

very truth, nor by any courtesy of law, or even by

any kindness of the Minister or Sovereign, could the

child of such a unión become the baronet, the Sir

Harry of the day, the head of the family. The posi-

tion was one which no Sovereign and no Minister

could achieve, or touch, or bestow. It was his, beyond

the power of any earthly potentate to deprive him of

it, and would have been transmitted by him to a son

with as absolute security. But--alas! alas

Sir Harry gave no indication that he thought it

expedient to change his mind on the subject. When

Lady Elizabeth proposed that Cousin George should

be asked to dinner, he frowned and looked black as

he acceded; but, in truth, he vacillated. The allure-

ments on that side were so great that he could not

altogether force upon himself the duty of throwing

them from him. He knew that Cousin George was

no fitting husband for his girl, that he was a man to

whom he would not have thought of giving her, had

her happiness been his only object. And he did not

!


52

think of so. bestowing her now. He became uneasy

when he remembered the danger. He was unhappy

as he remembered how amusing, how handsome, how

attractive was Cousin George. He feared that Emily

might like him!--by no means hoped it. And yet he

vacillated, and allowed Cousin George to come to the

house, only because Cousin George must become, on

his death, the head of the Hotspurs. .

Cousin George came on one Sunday, came on

another Sunday, dined at the house, and was of course

asked to the ball. But Lady Elizabeth had so ar-

ranged her little affairs that when Cousin George left

Bruton Street on the evening of the dinner party he

and Emily had never been for two minutes alone to-

gether since the family had come up to London.

Lady Elizabeth herself liked Cousin George, and, had

an edict to. that effect been pronounced by her hus-

band, would have left them alone together with great

maternal satisfaction. But she had been told that it

was not to be so, and therefore the young people had

never been allowed to have opportunities. Lady

Elizabeth in her very quiet way knew how to do the

work of the world that was allotted to her. There

had been other balls, and there had been ridings in

the Park, and all the chances of life which young men,

and sometimes young women also, know so well how

to use; but hitherto Cousin George had kept, or had

been constrained to keep, his distance, lis


53

“I want to know, Mamma,” said Emily Hotspur,

the day before the ball, “whether Cousin George is a

black sheep or a white sheep?"

“What do you mean, my dear, by asking such a

question as that?"

“I don't like black sheep. I don't see why young

men are to be allowed to be black sheep; but yet you

know they are.” :

“How can it be helped?”

“People should not notice them, Mamma.”

“My dear, it is a most difficult question, - quite

beyond me, and I am sure beyond you. A sheep

needn't be black always because he has not always

been quite white; and then you know the black lambs

are just as dear to their mother as the white.” .

“Dearer, I think.”

"I quite agree with you, Emily, that in general

society black sheep should be avoided.”

“Then they shouldn't be allowed to come in," said

Emily. Lady Elizabeth knew from this that there

was danger, but the danger was not of a kind which

enabled her specially to consult Sir Harry.

-


CHAPTER V.

'

George Hotspur.

A LITTLE must now be told to the reader of Cousin

George and the ways of his life. As Lady Elizabeth

had said to her daughter, thạt question of admitting

black sheep into society, or of refusing them admit-

tance, is very difficult. In the first place, whose eyes

are good enough to know whether in truth a sheep be

black or not? And then is it not the fact that some

little amount of shade in the fleece of male sheep is

considered, if not absolutely desirable, at any rate

quite pardonable? A male sheep with a fleece as

white as that of a ewe-lamb,-is he not considered to

be, among muttons, somewhat insipid? It was of this

taste of which Pope was conscious when he declared

that every woman was at heart a rake. And so it

comes to pass that very black sheep indeed are ad-

mitted into society, till at last anxious fathers and more

anxious mothers begin to be aware that their young

ones are turned out to graze among ravenous wolves.

This, however, must be admitted, that lambs when so

treated acquire a courage which tends to enable them

to hold their own, even amidst wolfish dangers.

Cousin George, if not a ravenous wolf, was at any


a

55

rate a very black sheep indeed. In our anxiety to

know the truth of him it must not be said that he was

absolutely a wolf,-- not as yet,-because in his career

he had not as yet made premeditated attempts to

devour prey. But in the process of delivering himself

up to be devoured by others, he had done things

which if known of any sheep should prevent that

sheep from being received into a decent flock. There

had been that little trouble about his commission, in

which, although he had not intended to cheat either

Jew, he had done that which the world would have

called cheating had the world known it. As for

getting goods from tradesmen without any hope or

thought of paying for them, that with him was so

much a thing of custom ,--as indeed it was also with

them,--that he was almost to be excused for con-

sidering it the normal condition of life for a man in

his position. To gamble and lose money had come

to him quite naturally at a very early age. There had

now come upon him an idea that he might turn the

tables, that in all gambling transactions some one must

win, and that as he had lost much, so possibly might

he now win more. He had not quite yet reached that

point in his education at which the gambler learns

that the ready way to win much is to win unfairly;-

not quite yet, but he was near it. The wolf hood was

coming on him, unless some good fortune might save

him. There might, however, be such good fortune in


56

store for him. As Lady Elizabeth had said, a sheep

that was very dark in colour might become white again.

If it be not so, what is all this doctrine of repentance

in which we believe?

; Blackness in a male sheep in regard to the other

sin is venial blackness. Whether the teller of such a

tale as this should say so outright, may be matter of

dispute; but, unless he say so, the teller of this tale

does not know how to tell his tale truly. Blackness

such as that will be all .condoned, and the sheep

received into almost any flock, on condition, not of

repentance or humiliation or confession, but simply of

change of practice. The change of practice in certain

circumstances and at a certain period becomes ex-

pedient; and if it be made, as regards tints in the

wool of that nature, the sheep becomes as white as he

is needed to be. In this respect our sheep had been

as black as any sheep, and at this present period of

his life had need of much change before he would be

fit for any decent social herding.

. And then there are the shades of black which come

from conviviality,—which we may call table blackness,

-as to which there is an opinion constantly dis-

seminated by the moral newspapers of the day, that -

there has come to be altogether an end of any such

blackness among sheep who are gentlemen. To make

up for this, indeed, there has been expressed by the

piquant newspapers of the day an opinion that ladies


57

are taking up the game which gentlemen no longer

care to play. It may be doubted whether either ex-

pression has in it much of truth. We do not see ladies

drunk, certainly, and we do not see gentlemen tumbling

about as they used to do, because their fashion of

drinking is not that of their grandfathers. But the

love of wine has not gone out from among men; and

men now are as prone as ever to indulge their loves.

Our black sheep was very fond of wine,—and also of

brandy, though he was wolf enough to hide his taste

when occasion required it.

Very early in life he had come from France to live

in England, and had been placed in a cavalry regi-

ment, which had, unfortunately for him, been quartered

either in London or its vicinity. And, perhaps equally

unfortunate for him, he had in his own possession a

small fortune of some 500l. a year. This had not

come to him from his father; and when his father had

died in Paris, about two years before the date of our

story, he had received no accession of regular income.

Some couple of thousand of pounds had reached his

hands from his father's effects, which had helped him

through some of the immediately pressing difficulties

of the day,—for his own income at that time had

been altogether dissipated. And now he had received

a much larger sum from his cousin, with an assurance,

however, that the family property would not become

his when he succeeded to the family title. He was so


58

penniless at the time, so prone to live from hand to

mouth, so little given to consideration of the future,

that it may be doubted whether the sum given to him

was not compensation in full for all that was to be

withheld from him.

Still there was his chance with the heiress! In

regarding this chance, he had very soon determined

that he would marry his cousin if it might be within

his power to do so. He knew, and fully appreciated,

his own advantages. He was a handsome man,-tall

for a Hotspur, but with the Hotspur fair hair and blue

eyes, and well-cut features. There lacked, however,

to him, that peculiar aspect of firmness about the

temples which so strongly marked the countenance of

Sir Harry and his daughter; and there had come upon

him a blasé look, and certain outer signs of a bad

life, which, however, did not mar his beauty, nor were

they always apparent. The eye was not always

bloodshot, nor was the hand constantly seen to shake.

It may be said of him, both as to his moral and

physical position, that he was on the edge of the

precipice of degradation, but that there was yet a

possibility of salvation.

He was living in a bachelor's set of rooms, at this

time, in St. James's Street, for which, it must be pre-

sumed, that ready money was required. During the

last winter he had horses in Northamptonshire, for the

hire of which, it must be feared, that his prospects


59:

as heir to Humblethwaite had in some degree been

pawned. At the present time he had a horse for Park

riding, and he looked upon a good dinner, with good

wine, as being due to him every day, as thoroughly

as though he earned it. That he had never attempted

to earn a shilling since the day on which he had

ceased to be a soldier, pow four years since, the

reader will hardly require to be informed,

In spite of all his faults, this man enjoyed a cer-

tain social popularity for which mạny a rich man would

have given a third of his income. Dukes and duchesses

were fond of him; and certain persons, standing very

high in the world, did not think certain parties were

perfect without him, ' He knew how to talk enough,

and yet not to talk too much. No one could say of

him that he was, witty, well-read, or given to much

thinking; but he knew just, what was wanted at this

point of time or at that, and could give it. He could

put himself forward, and could keep himself in the

background. He could shoot well without wanting to

shoot best. He could fetch and carry, but still do it

always with an air of manly independence. He could

subserve without an air of cringing. And then he

looked like a gentleman.

Of all his well-to-do friends, perhaps he who really

liked him best was the Earl of Altringham. George

Hotspur was at this time something under thirty years

of age, and the Earl was four years his senior. The


60

Earl was a married man, with a family, a wife who

also liked poor George, an enormous income, and a

place in Scotland at which George always spent the

three first weeks of grouse-shooting. The Earl was a

kindly, good-humoured, liberal, but yet hard man of

the world. He knew George Hotspur well, and would

on no account lend him a shilling. He would not

have given his friend money to extricate him from any

difficulty. But he forgave the sinner all his sins, opened

Castle Corry to him every year, provided him with the

best of everything, and let him come and dine at Al-

tringham House, in Carlton Gardens, as often almost

as he chose during the London season. The Earl was

very good to George, though he knew more about him

than perhaps did any other man; but he would not bet

with George, nor would he in any way allow George

to make money out of him.

“Do you suppose that I want to win money of

you?” he once said to our friend, in answer to a little

proposition that was made to him at Newmarket. “I

don't suppose you do,” George had answered. “Then

you may be sure that I don't want to lose any,” the

Earl had replied. And so the matter was ended, and

George made no more propositions of the kind.

The two men were together at Tattersall's, looking

at some horses which the Earl had sent up to be sold

the day after the dinner in Bruton Street. “Sir Harry


611

seems to be taking to you very kindly," said the

Earl.

“Well,-yes; in a half-and-half sort of way."

“It isn't everybody that would give you £5,000,

you know." ..

"I am not everybody's heir," said George. :

“No; and you ain't his, - worse luck.”

"I am,-in regard to the title.”

“What good will that do you?”

“When he's gone, I shall be the head of the

family. As far as I can understand these matters, he

hasn't a right to leave the estates away from me.”

. “Power is right, my boy. Legal power is un-

doubtedly right.”

.., "He should at any rate divide them. There are

two distinct properties, and either of them would make

me a rich man. I don't feel so very much obliged

to him for his money, - though of course it was con-

venient.”

“Very convenient, I should say, George. How do

you get on with your cousin?”

“They watch me like a cat watches a mouse.”

“Say a rat, rather, George. Don't you know they

are right? Would not I do the same if she were my

girl, knowing you as I do?”

“She might do worse, my Lord.”

“I'll tell you what it is. He thinks that he might

do worse. I don't doubt about that. All this matter


62

of the family and the title, and the name, would make

him ready to fling her to you,- if only you were a

shade less dark a horse than you are.”

"I don't know that I'm darker than others.”

“Look here, old fellow; I don't often trouble you

with advice, but I will now. If you'll set yourself

steadily to work to live decently, if you'll tell Sir Harry

the whole truth about your money matters, and really

get into harness, I believe you may have her. Such a

one as you never had such a chance before. But

there's one thing you must do."

“What is the one thing?”

“Wash your hands altogether of Mrs. Morton.

You'll have a difficulty, I know, and perhaps it will

want more pluck than you've got. You haven't got

pluck of that kind."

“You mean that I don't like to break a woman's

Heart?"

“Fiddlestick! Do you see that mare, there?”

“I was just looking at her. Why should you part

with her?”

“She was the best animal in my stables, but she's

given to eating the stable-boys; old Badger told me

fat, that he wouldn't have her in the stables any

longer. I pity the fellow who will buy her,--or rather

his fellow. She killed a lad once in Brookborough's

stables."

“Why don't you shoot her?”


63

“I can't afford to shoot horses, Captain Hotspur.

I had my chance in buying het, and somebody else

must have his chance now. That's the lot of them;

one or two good ones, and the rest what I call rags.

Do you think of what I've said; and be sure of this:

Mrs. Morton and your cousin can't go on together.

Ta, Ta!-- I'm going across to my mother's.”

George Hotspur, when he was left alone, did think

a great deal about it. He was not a man prone to

assure himself of a lady's favour without cause; and

yet he did think that his cousin liked him. As to

that terrible difficulty to which Lord Altringham had

alluded, he knew that something must be done; but

there were cruel embarrassments on that side of which

even Altringham knew nothing. And then why should

he do that which his friend had indicated to him, be-

fore he knew whether it would be necessary? As to

taking Sir Harry altogether into his confidence about

his money matters, that was clearly impossible. Heaven

and earth! How could the one man speak such truths,

or the other man listen to them? When money diffi-

culties come of such nature as those which weighted

the shoulders of poor George Hotspur, it is quite im-

possible that there should be any such confidence with

any one. The sufferer cannot even make a confidant

of himself, cannot even bring himself to look at his

own troubles massed together. It was not the amount

of his debts, but the nature of them, and the charac,


64

ters of the men with whom he had dealings, that were

so terrible. Fifteen thousand pounds -- less than one

year's income from Sir Harry's property — would clear

him of everything, as far as he could judge; but there

could be no such clearing, otherwise than by money

disbursed by himself, without a disclosure of dirt which

he certainly would not dare to make to Sir Harry be-

fore his marriage.

But yet the prize to be won was so great, and

there were so many reasons for thinking that it might

possibly be within his grasp! If, after all, he might

live to be Sir George Hotspur of Humblethwaite and

Scarrowby! After thinking of it as well as he could,

he determined that he would make the attempt; but

as to those preliminaries to which Lord Altringham

had referred, he would for the present leave them to

chance.

Lord Altringham had been quite right when he told

George Hotspur that he was deficient in a certain kind

of pluck.


CHAPTER VI.

The Ball in Bruton Street.

SIR HARRY vacillated, Lady Elizabeth doubted, and

Cousin George was allowed to come to the ball. At

this time, in the common understanding of such

phrase, Emily Hotspur was heart-whole in regard to

her cousin. Had she been made to know that he

had gone away for ever,- been banished to some

antipodes from which he never could return,—there

would have been no lasting sorrow on her part,

though there might have been some feeling which

would have given her an ache for the moment. She

had thought about him, as girls will think of men as

to whom they own to themselves that it is possible

that they may be in love with them some day;—and

she liked him much. She also liked Lord Alfred, but

the liking had been altogether of a different kind. In

regard to Lord Alfred she had been quite sure, from

the first days of her intercourse with him, that she

could never be in love with him. He was to her no

more than old Mr. Crutchley or young Mr. Latheby,

-a man, and a good sort of man, but no more than

a man. To worship Lord Alfred must be impossible

to her. She had already conceived that it would be

Sir Harry Hotspur,


66

quite possible for her to worship her Cousin George

in the teeth of all the hard things that she had heard

of him. The reader may be sure that such a thought

had passed through her riind when she asked her

mother whether Cousin George was to be accepted as

a black sheep or a white one?

The ball was a very grand affair, and Emily

Hotspur was a very great lady. It had come to be

understood that the successful suitor for her hand

would be the future lord of Humblethwaite, and the

power with which she was thus vested gave her a

prestige and standing which can hardly be attained

by mere wit and beauty, even when most perfectly

combined. It was not that all who worshipped, either

at a distance or with passing homage, knew the fact.

of the heiress-ship, or had ever heard of the £20,000

a year; but, given the status, and the worshippers will

come. The word had gone forth in some mysterious

way, and it was acknowledged that Emily Hotspur

was a great young lady. Other young ladies, who

were not great, allowed themselves to be postponed

to her almost without jealousy, and young gentlemen

without pretensions regarded her as one to whom

they did not dare to ask to be introduced. Emily

saw it all, and partly liked it, and partly despised it.

But, even when despising it, she took advantage of it.

The young gentlemen without pretensions were no

more to her than the chairs and tables; and the


67

young ladies who submitted to her and adored her,-

were allowed to be submissive, and to adore. But of

this she was quite sure,—that her Cousin George must

some day be the head of her own family. He was a

man whom she was bound to treat with attentive

regard, if they who had the custody of her chose to

place her in his company at all.

At this ball there were some very distinguished

people indeed, -persons whom it would hardly be

improper to call illustrious. There were two royal

duchesses, one of whom was English, and no less

than three princes. The Russian and French ambas-

sadors were both there. There was the editor of the

most influential newspaper of the day,—for a few

minutes only; and the Prime Minister passed through

the room in the course of the evening. Dukes and

duchesses below the royal degree were common; and

as for earls and countesses, and their daughters, they

formed the ruck of the crowd. The Poet-laureate

didn't come indeed, but was expected; and three

Chinese mandarins of the first quality entered the

room at eleven, and did not leave till one. Poor

Lady Elizabeth suffered a great deal with those man-

darins. From all this it will be seen that the ball was

quite a success.

George Hotspur dined that day with Lord and

Lady Altringham, and went with them to the ball in

the evening. Lord Altringham, though his manner

5*


68

was airy and almost indifferent, was in truth most

anxious that his friend should be put upon his feet

by the marriage; and the Countess was so keen about

it, that there was nothing in the way of innocent in-

trigue which she would not have done to accomplish

it. She knew that George Hotspur was a rake, was

a gambler, was in debt, was hampered by other diffi-

culties, and all the rest of it; but she liked the man,

and was therefore willing to believe that a rich mar-

riage would put it all right. Emily Hotspur was no-

thing to her, nor was Sir Harry; but George had often

made her own house pleasant to her, and therefore, to

her thinking, deserved a wife with £20,000 a year.

And then, if there might have been scruples under

other circumstances, that fact of the baronetcy over-

came them. It could not be wrong in one placed

as was Lady Altringham to assist in preventing any

separation of the title and the property. Of course

George might probably squander all that he could

squander; but that might be made right by settlements

and entails. Lady Altringham was much more ener-

getic than her husband, and had made out quite a plan

of the manner in which George should proceed. She

discussed the matter with him at great length. The

one difficulty she was, indeed, obliged to slur over;

but even that was not altogether omitted in her scheme.

“Whatever incumbrances there may be, free yourself

from them at once,” she had advised.


69

“That is so very easy to say, Lady Altringham,

but so difficult to do.”

“As to debts, of course they can't be paid without

money. Sir Harry will find it worth his while to

settle any debts. But if there is anything else, stop

it at once.” Of course there was something else, and

of course Lady Altringham knew what that something

else was. She demanded, in accordance with her

scheme, that George should lose no time. This was

in May. It was known that Sir Harry intended to

leave town early in June. “Of course you will take

him at his word, and go to Humblethwaite when you

leave us,” she had said.

“No time has been named.”

“Then you can name your own without difficulty.

You will write from Castle Corry and say you are

coming. That is, if it's not all settled by that time.

Of course, it cannot be done in a minute, because Sir

Harry must consent; but I should begin at once,

only, Captain Hotspur, leave nothing for them to find

out afterwards. What is past they will forgive.” Such

had been Lady Altringham's advice, and no doubt she

understood the matter which she had been discussing.

When George Hotspur entered the room, his cousin

was dancing with a prince. He could see her as he

stood speaking a few words to Lady Elizabeth. And

in talking to Lady Elizabeth he did not talk as a

stranger would, or a common guest. He had quite


70

understood all that he might gain by assuming the

intimacy of cousinhood, and he had assumed it. Lady

Elizabeth was less weary than before when he stood

by her, and accepted from his hand some little trifle

of help, which was agreeable to her. And he showed

himself in no hurry, and told her some little story that

pleased her. What a pity it was that Cousin George

should be a scamp, she thought, as he went on to

greet Sir Harry.

And with Sir Harry he remained a minute or two.

On such an occasion as this Sir Harry was all smiles,

and quite willing to hear a little town gossip. “Come

with the Altringhams, have you? I'm told Altring-

ham has just sold all his horses. What's the meaning

of that?”

“The old story, Sir Harry. He has weeded his

stable, and got the buyers to think that they were

getting the cream. There isn't a man in England

knows better what he's about than Altringham.