Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite was a mighty person in Cumberland,
 and one who well understood of what nature were the duties, and of
 what sort the magnificence, which his position as a great English
 commoner required of him. He had twenty thousand a year derived from
 land. His forefathers had owned the same property in Cumberland for
 nearly four centuries, and an estate nearly as large in Durham for
 more than a century and a half. He had married an earl's daughter,
 and had always lived among men and women not only of high rank, but
 also of high character. He had kept race-horses when he was young, as
 noblemen and gentlemen then did keep them, with no view to profit,
 calculating fairly their cost as a part of his annual outlay, and
 thinking that it was the proper thing to do for the improvement
 of horses and for the amusement of the people. He had been in
 Parliament, but had made no figure there, and had given it up. He
 still kept his house in Bruton Street, and always spent a month or
 two in London. But the life that he led was led at Humblethwaite, and
 there he was a great man, with a great domain around him,--with many
 tenants, with a world of dependants among whom he spent his wealth
 freely, saving little, but lavishing nothing that was not his own
 to lavish,--understanding that his enjoyment was to come from the
 comfort and respect of others, for whose welfare, as he understood
 it, the good things of this world had been bestowed upon him. He was
 a proud man, with but few intimacies,--with a few dear friendships
 which were the solace of his life,--altogether gracious in his
 speech, if it were not for an apparent bashfulness among strangers;
 never assuming aught, deferring much to others outwardly, and showing
 his pride chiefly by a certain impalpable _noli me tangere_, which
 just sufficed to make itself felt and obeyed at the first approach of
 any personal freedom. He was a handsome man,--if an old man near to
 seventy may be handsome,--with grey hair, and bright, keen eyes, and
 arched eyebrows, with a well-cut eagle nose, and a small mouth, and a
 short dimpled chin. He was under the middle height, but nevertheless
 commanded attention by his appearance. He wore no beard save a slight
 grey whisker, which was cut away before it reached his chin. He was
 strongly made, but not stout, and was hale and active for his age.
 
 Such was Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite. The account of Lady
 Elizabeth, his wife, may be much shorter. She was known,--where she
 was known,--simply as Sir Harry's wife. He indeed was one of those
 men of whom it may be said that everything appertaining to them takes
 its importance from the fact of its being theirs. Lady Elizabeth was
 a good woman, a good wife, and a good mother, and was twenty years
 younger than her husband. He had been forty-five years old when he
 had married her, and she, even yet, had not forgotten the deference
 which was due to his age.
 
 Two years before the time at which our story will begin, a great
 sorrow, an absolutely crushing grief, had fallen upon the House
 of Humblethwaite. An only son had died just as he had reached his
 majority. When the day came on which all Humblethwaite and the
 surrounding villages were to have been told to rejoice and make merry
 because another man of the Hotspurs was ready to take the reins of
 the house as soon as his father should have been gathered to his
 fathers, the poor lad lay a-dying, while his mother ministered by
 his bedside, and the Baronet was told by the physician--who had been
 brought from London--that there was no longer for him any hope that
 he should leave a male heir at Humblethwaite to inherit his name and
 his honours.
 
 For months it was thought that Lady Elizabeth would follow her boy.
 Sir Harry bore the blow bravely, though none who do not understand
 the system well can conceive how the natural grief of the father was
 increased by the disappointment which had fallen upon the head of the
 house. But the old man bore it well, making but few audible moans,
 shedding no tears, altering in very little the habits of life; still
 spending money, because it was good for others that it should be
 spent, and only speaking of his son when it was necessary for him to
 allude to those altered arrangements as to the family property which
 it was necessary that he should make. But still he was a changed man,
 as those perceived who watched him closest. Cloudesdale the butler
 knew well in what he was changed, as did old Hesketh the groom, and
 Gilsby the gamekeeper. He had never been given to much talk, but was
 now more silent than of yore. Of horses, dogs, and game there was
 no longer any mention whatever made by the Baronet. He was still
 constant with Mr. Lanesby, the steward, because it was his duty to
 know everything that was done on the property; but even Mr. Lanesby
 would acknowledge that, as to actual improvements,--the commencement
 of new work in the hope of future returns, the Baronet was not at all
 the man he had been. How was it possible that he should be the man he
 had been when his life was so nearly gone, and that other life had
 gone also, which was to have been the renewal and continuation of his
 own?
 
 When the blow fell, it became Sir Harry's imperative duty to make
 up his mind what he would do with his property. As regarded the two
 estates, they were now absolutely, every acre of them, at his own
 disposal. He had one child left him, a daughter,--in whom, it is
 hoped, the reader may be induced to take some interest, and with
 her to feel some sympathy, for she will be the person with whom the
 details of this little story must most be concerned; and he had a
 male heir, who must needs inherit the title of the family, one George
 Hotspur,--not a nephew, for Sir Harry had never had a brother, but
 the son of a first cousin who had not himself been much esteemed at
 Humblethwaite.
 
 Now Sir Harry was a man who, in such a condition as this in which
 he was now placed, would mainly be guided by his ideas of duty. For
 a month or two he said not a word to any one, not even to his own
 lawyer, though he himself had made a will, a temporary will, duly
 witnessed by Mr. Lanesby and another, so that the ownership of the
 property should not be adjusted simply by the chance direction of law
 in the event of his own sudden demise; but his mind was doubtless
 much burdened with the subject. How should he discharge this fresh
 responsibility which now rested on him? While his boy had lived, the
 responsibility of his property had had nothing for him but charms.
 All was to go to the young Harry,--all, as a matter of course; and
 it was only necessary for him to take care that every acre should
 descend to his heir not only unimpaired by him in value, but also
 somewhat increased. Provision for his widow and for his girl had
 already been made before he had ventured on matrimony,--provision
 sufficient for many girls had Fortune so far favoured him. But that
 an eldest son should have all the family land,--one, though as many
 sons should have been given to him as to Priam,--and that that one
 should have it unencumbered, as he had had it from his father,--this
 was to him the very law of his being. And he would have taught that
 son, had already begun to teach him when the great blow came, that
 all this was to be given to him, not that he might put it into
 his own belly, or wear it on his own back, or even spend it as he
 might list himself, but that he might so live as to do his part in
 maintaining that order of gentlehood in England, by which England had
 become--so thought Sir Harry--the proudest and the greatest and the
 justest of nations.
 
 But now he had no son, and yet the duty remained to him of
 maintaining his order. It would perhaps have been better for him,
 it would certainly have been easier, had some settlement or family
 entail fixed all things for him. Those who knew him well personally,
 but did not know the affairs of his family, declared among themselves
 that Sir Harry would take care that the property went with the title.
 A marriage might be arranged. There could be nothing to object to a
 marriage between second cousins. At any rate Sir Harry Hotspur was
 certainly not the man to separate the property from the title. But
 they who knew the family, and especially that branch of the family
 from which George Hotspur came, declared that Sir Harry would never
 give his daughter to such a one as was this cousin. And if not his
 daughter, then neither would he give to such a scapegrace either
 Humblethwaite in Cumberland or Scarrowby in Durham. There did exist a
 party who said that Sir Harry would divide the property, but they who
 held such an opinion certainly knew very little of Sir Harry's social
 or political tenets. Any such division was the one thing which he
 surely would not effect.
 
 When twelve months had passed after the death of Sir Harry's son,
 George Hotspur had been at Humblethwaite and had gone, and Sir
 Harry's will had been made. He had left everything to his daughter,
 and had only stipulated that her husband, should she marry, should
 take the name of Hotspur. He had decided, that should his daughter,
 as was probable, marry within his lifetime, he could then make what
 settlements he pleased, even to the changing of the tenor of his
 will, should he think fit to change it. Should he die and leave her
 still a spinster, he would trust to her in everything. Not being
 a man of mystery, he told his wife and his daughter what he had
 done,--and what he still thought that he possibly might do; and
 being also a man to whom any suspicion of injustice was odious, he
 desired his attorney to make known to George Hotspur what had been
 settled. And in order that this blow to Cousin George might be
 lightened,--Cousin George having in conversation acknowledged to a
 few debts,--an immediate present was made to him of four thousand
 pounds, and double that amount was assured to him at the Baronet's
 death.
 
 The reader may be sure that the Baronet had heard many things
 respecting Cousin George which he did not like. To him personally it
 would have been infinitely preferable that the title and the estates
 should have gone together, than that his own daughter should be a
 great heiress. That her outlook into the world was fair and full of
 promise of prosperity either way, was clear enough. Twenty thousand
 a year would not be necessary to make her a happy woman. And then it
 was to him a manifest and a sacred religion that to no man or to no
 woman were appointed the high pinnacles of fortune simply that that
 man or that woman might enjoy them. They were to be held as thrones
 are held, for the benefit of the many. And in the disposition of this
 throne, the necessity of making which had fallen upon him from the
 loss of his own darling, he had brought himself to think--not of his
 daughter's happiness, or to the balance of which, in her possessing
 or not possessing the property, he could venture on no prophecy,--but
 of the welfare of all those who might measure their weal or woe from
 the manner in which the duties of this high place were administered.
 He would fain that there should still have been a Sir Harry or a Sir
 George Hotspur of Humblethwaite; but he found that his duty required
 him to make the other arrangement.
 
 And yet he had liked the cousin, who indeed had many gifts to win
 liking both from men and women. Previously to the visit very little
 had been known personally of young George Hotspur at Humblethwaite.
 His father, also a George, had in early life quarrelled with the
 elder branch of the family, and had gone off with what money belonged
 to him, and had lived and died in Paris. The younger George had been
 educated abroad, and then had purchased a commission in a regiment of
 English cavalry. At the time when young Harry died it was only known
 of him at Humblethwaite that he had achieved a certain reputation
 in London, and that he had sold out of the army. He was talked of
 as a man who shot birds with precision. Pigeons he could shoot with
 wonderful dexterity,--which art was at Humblethwaite supposed to be
 much against him. But then he was equally successful with partridges
 and pheasants; and partly on account of such success, and partly
 probably because his manner was pleasant, he was known to be a
 welcome guest at houses in which men congregate to slaughter game. In
 this way he had a reputation, and one that was not altogether cause
 for reproach; but it had not previously recommended him to the notice
 of his cousin.
 
 Just ten months after poor Harry's death he was asked, and went, to
 Humblethwaite. Probably at that moment the Baronet's mind was still
 somewhat in doubt. The wish of Lady Elizabeth had been clearly
 expressed to her husband to the effect that encouragement should be
 given to the young people to fall in love with each other. To this
 Sir Harry never assented; though there was a time,--and that time had
 not yet passed when George Hotspur reached Humblethwaite,--in which
 the Baronet was not altogether averse to the idea of the marriage.
 But when George left Humblethwaite the Baronet had made up his mind.
 Tidings had reached him, and he was afraid of the cousin. And other
 tidings had reached him also; or rather perhaps it would be truer
 to him to say that another idea had come to him. Of all the young
 men now rising in England there was no young man who more approved
 himself to Sir Harry's choice than did Lord Alfred Gresley, the
 second son of his old friend and political leader the Marquis of
 Milnthorp. Lord Alfred had but scanty fortune of his own, but was
 in Parliament and in office, and was doing well. All men said all
 good things of him. Then there was a word or two spoken between
 the Marquis and the Baronet, and just a word also with Lord Alfred
 himself. Lord Alfred had no objection to the name of Hotspur. This
 was in October, while George Hotspur was still declaring that Gilbsy
 knew nothing of getting up a head of game; and then Lord Alfred
 promised to come to Humblethwaite at Christmas. It was after this
 that George owned to a few debts. His confession on that score did
 him no harm. Sir Harry had made up his mind that day. Sir Harry had
 at that time learned a good deal of his cousin George's mode of life
 in London, and had already decided that this young man was not one
 whom it would be well to set upon the pinnacle.
 
 And yet he had liked the young man, as did everybody. Lady Elizabeth
 had liked him much, and for a fortnight had gone on hoping that all
 difficulties might have solved themselves by the young man's marriage
 with her daughter. It need hardly be said that not a word one way or
 the other was spoken to Emily Hotspur; but it seemed to the mother
 that the young people, though there was no love-making, yet liked
 each other. Sir Harry at this time was up in London for a month or
 two, hearing tidings, seeing Lord Alfred, who was at his office; and
 on his return, that solution by family marriage was ordered to be for
 ever banished from the maternal bosom. Sir Harry said that it would
 not do.
 
 Nevertheless, he was good to the young cousin, and when the time was
 drawing nigh for the young man's departure he spoke of a further
 visit. The coverts at Humblethwaite, such as they were, would always
 be at his service. This was a week before the cousin went; but by the
 coming of the day on which the cousin took his departure Sir Harry
 regretted that he had made that offer of future hospitality.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER II.
 
 OUR HEROINE.
 
 
 "He has said nothing to her?" asked Sir Harry, anxiously, of his
 wife.
 
 "I think not," replied Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "Had he said anything that meant anything, she would have told you?"
 
 "Certainly she would," said Lady Elizabeth.
 
 Sir Harry knew his child, and was satisfied that no harm had been
 done; nevertheless, he wished that that further invitation had
 not been given. If this Christmas visitor that was to come to
 Humblethwaite could be successful, all would be right; but it had
 seemed to Sir Harry, during that last week of Cousin George's sojourn
 beneath his roof, there had been more of cousinly friendship between
 the cousins than had been salutary, seeing, as he had seen, that any
 closer connection was inexpedient. But he thought that he was sure
 that no great harm had been done. Had any word been spoken to his
 girl which she herself had taken as a declaration of love, she would
 certainly have told her mother. Sir Harry would no more doubt his
 daughter than he would his own honour. There were certain points
 and lines of duty clearly laid down for a girl so placed as was his
 daughter; and Sir Harry, though he could not have told whence the
 knowledge of these points and lines had come to his child, never for
 a moment doubted but that she knew them, and would obey them. To know
 and to obey such points of duty were a part of the inheritance of
 such an one as Emily Hotspur. Nevertheless, it might be possible that
 her fancy should be touched, and that she herself should know nothing
 of it,--nothing that she could confide even to a mother. Sir Harry
 understanding this, and having seen in these last days something as
 he thought of too close a cousinly friendship, was anxious that Lord
 Alfred should come and settle everything. If Lord Alfred should be
 successful, all danger would be at an end, and the cousin might come
 again and do what he liked with the coverts. Alas, alas! the cousin
 should never have been allowed to show his handsome, wicked face at
 Humblethwaite!
 
 Emily Hotspur was a girl whom any father would have trusted; and
 let the reader understand this of her, that she was one in whom
 intentional deceit was impossible. Neither to her father nor to any
 one could she lie either in word or action. And all these lines and
 points of duty were well known to her, though she knew not, and had
 never asked herself, whence the lesson had come. Will it be too much
 to say, that they had formed a part of her breeding, and had been
 given to her with her blood? She understood well that from her, as
 heiress of the House of Humblethwaite, a double obedience was due
 to her father,--the obedience of a child added to that which was
 now required from her as the future transmitter of honours of the
 house. And yet no word had been said to her of the honours of the
 house; nor, indeed, had many words ever been said as to that other
 obedience. These lessons, when they have been well learned, have ever
 come without direct teaching.
 
 But she knew more than this, and the knowledge had reached her in the
 same manner. Though she owed a great duty to her father, there was
 a limit to that duty, of which, unconsciously, she was well aware.
 When her mother told her that Lord Alfred was coming, having been
 instructed to do so by Sir Harry; and hinted, with a caress and a
 kiss, and a soft whisper, that Lord Alfred was one of whom Sir Harry
 approved greatly, and that if further approval could be bestowed Sir
 Harry would not be displeased, Emily as she returned her mother's
 embrace, felt that she had a possession of her own with which neither
 father nor mother might be allowed to interfere. It was for them, or
 rather for him, to say that a hand so weighted as was hers should not
 be given here or there; but it was not for them, not even for him, to
 say that her heart was to be given here, or to be given there. Let
 them put upon her what weight they might of family honours, and of
 family responsibility, that was her own property;--if not, perhaps,
 to be bestowed at her own pleasure, because of the pressure of that
 weight, still her own, and absolutely beyond the bestowal of any
 other.
 
 Nevertheless, she declared to herself, and whispered to her mother,
 that she would be glad to welcome Lord Alfred. She had known him well
 when she was a child of twelve years old and he was already a young
 man in Parliament. Since those days she had met him more than once in
 London. She was now turned twenty, and he was something more than ten
 years her senior; but there was nothing against him, at any rate, on
 the score of age. Lord Alfred was admitted on every side to be still
 a young man; and though he had already been a lord of one Board or
 of another for the last four years, and had earned a reputation for
 working, he did not look like a man who would be more addicted to
 sitting at Boards than spending his time with young women. He was
 handsome, pleasant, good-humoured, and full of talk; had nothing
 about him of the official fogy; and was regarded by all his friends
 as a man who was just now fit to marry. "They say that he is such a
 good son, and such a good brother," said Lady Elizabeth, anxiously.
 
 "Quite a Phoenix!" said Emily, laughing. Then Lady Elizabeth began
 to fear that she had said too much, and did not mention Lord Alfred's
 name for two days.
 
 But Miss Hotspur had by that time resolved that Lord Alfred should
 have a fair chance. If she could teach herself to think that of all
 men walking the earth Lord Alfred was the best and the most divine,
 the nearest of all men to a god, how excellent a thing would it be!
 Her great responsibility as to the family burden would in that case
 already be acquitted with credit. The wishes of her father, which on
 such a subject were all but paramount, would be gratified; and she
 herself would then be placed almost beyond the hand of misfortune to
 hurt her. At any rate, the great and almost crushing difficulty of
 her life would so be solved. But the man must have enough in her eyes
 of that godlike glory to satisfy her that she had found in him one
 who would be almost a divinity, at any rate to her. Could he speak as
 that other man spoke? Could he look as that other one looked? Would
 there be in his eye such a depth of colour, in his voice such a sound
 of music, in his gait so divine a grace? For that other one, though
 she had looked into the brightness of the colour, though she had
 heard the sweetness of the music, though she had watched the elastic
 spring of the step, she cared nothing as regarded her heart--her
 heart, which was the one treasure of her own. No; she was sure of
 that. Of her one own great treasure, she was much too chary to give
 it away unasked, and too independent, as she told herself, to give
 it away unauthorized. The field was open to Lord Alfred; and, as her
 father wished it, Lord Alfred should be received with every favour.
 If she could find divinity, then she would bow before it readily.
 
 Alas for Lord Alfred! We may all know that when she thought of it
 thus, there was but poor chance of success for Lord Alfred. Let him
 have what of the godlike he might, she would find but little of it
 there when she made her calculations and resolutions after such
 fashion as this. The man who becomes divine in a woman's eyes, has
 generally achieved his claim to celestial honours by sudden assault.
 And, alas! the qualities which carry him through it and give the halo
 to his head may after all be very ungodlike. Some such achievement
 had already fallen in the way of Cousin George; though had Cousin
 George and Lord Alfred been weighed in just scales, the divinity of
 the latter, such as it was, would have been found greatly to prevail.
 Indeed, it might perhaps have been difficult to lay hold of and bring
 forward as presentable for such office as that of a lover for such
 a girl any young man who should be less godlike than Cousin George.
 But he had gifts of simulation, which are valuable; and poor Emily
 Hotspur had not yet learned the housewife's trick of passing the web
 through her fingers, and of finding by the touch whether the fabric
 were of fine wool, or of shoddy made up with craft to look like wool
 of the finest.
 
 We say that there was but small chance for Lord Alfred; nevertheless
 the lady was dutifully minded to give him all the chance that it was
 in her power to bestow. She did not tell herself that her father's
 hopes were vain. Of her preference for that other man she never told
 herself anything. She was not aware that it existed. She knew that he
 was handsome; she thought that he was clever. She knew that he had
 talked to her as no man had ever talked before. She was aware that
 he was her nearest relative beyond her father and mother, and that
 therefore she might be allowed to love him as a cousin. She told
 herself that he was a Hotspur, and that he must be the head of the
 Hotspurs when her father should be taken from them. She thought
 that he looked as a man should look who would have to carry such a
 dignity. But there was nothing more. No word had been said to her on
 the subject; but she was aware, because no word had been said, that
 it was not thought fitting that she should be her cousin's bride. She
 could not but know how great would be the advantage could the estates
 and the title be kept together. Even though he should inherit no
 acre of the land,--and she had been told by her father that such
 was his decision,--this Cousin George must become the head of the
 House of Hotspur; and to be head of the House of Hotspur was to
 her a much greater thing than to be the owner of Humblethwaite and
 Scarrowby. Gifts like the latter might be given to a mere girl, like
 herself,--were to be so given. But let any man living do what he
 might, George Hotspur must become the head and chief of the old House
 of Hotspur. Nevertheless, it was not for her to join the two things
 together, unless her father should see that it would be good for her
 to do so.
 
 Emily Hotspur was very like her father, having that peculiar cast of
 countenance which had always characterized the family. She had the
 same arch in her eyebrows, indicating an aptitude for authority; the
 same well-formed nose, though with her the beak of the eagle was less
 prominent; the same short lip, and small mouth, and delicate dimpled
 chin. With both of them the lower part of the face was peculiarly
 short, and finely cut. With both of them the brow was high and broad,
 and the temples prominent. But the girl's eyes were blue, while those
 of the old man were brightly green. It was told of him that when a
 boy his eyes also had been blue. Her hair, which was very plentiful,
 was light in colour, but by no means flaxen. Her complexion was as
 clear as the finest porcelain; but there were ever roses in her
 cheeks, for she was strong by nature, and her health was perfect. She
 was somewhat short of stature, as were all the Hotspurs, and her feet
 and hands and ears were small and delicate. But though short, she
 seemed to lack nothing in symmetry, and certainly lacked nothing in
 strength. She could ride or walk the whole day, and had no feeling
 that such vigour of body was a possession of which a young lady
 should be ashamed. Such as she was, she was the acknowledged beauty
 of the county; and at Carlisle, where she showed herself at least
 once a year at the county ball, there was neither man nor woman,
 young nor old, who was not ready to say that Emily Hotspur was, among
 maidens, the glory of Cumberland.
 
 Her life hitherto had been very quiet. There was the ball at
 Carlisle, which she had attended thrice; on the last occasion,
 because of her brother's death, she had been absent, and the family
 of the Hotspurs had been represented there only by the venison and
 game which had been sent from Humblethwaite. Twice also she had spent
 the months of May and June in London; but it had not hitherto suited
 the tone of her father's character to send his daughter out into all
 the racket of a London season. She had gone to balls, and to the
 opera, and had ridden in the Park, and been seen at flower-shows;
 but she had not been so common in those places as to be known to the
 crowd. And, hitherto, neither in town or country, had her name been
 connected with that of any suitor for her hand. She was now twenty,
 and the reader will remember that in the twelve months last past, the
 House of Humblethwaite had been clouded with deep mourning.
 
 The cousin was come and gone, and the Baronet hoped in his heart
 that there might be an end of him as far as Humblethwaite was
 concerned;--at any rate till his child should have given herself to a
 better lover. Tidings had been sent to Sir Harry during the last week
 of the young man's sojourn beneath his roof, which of all that had
 reached his ears were the worst. He had before heard of recklessness,
 of debt, of dissipation, of bad comrades. Now he heard of worse than
 these. If that which he now heard was true, there had been dishonour.
 But Sir Harry was a man who wanted ample evidence before he allowed
 his judgment to actuate his conduct, and in this case the evidence
 was far from ample. He did not stint his hospitality to the future
 baronet, but he failed to repeat that promise of a future welcome
 which had already been given, and which had been thankfully accepted.
 But a man knows that such an offer of renewed hospitality should be
 repeated at the moment of departure, and George Hotspur, as he was
 taken away to the nearest station in his cousin's carriage, was quite
 aware that Sir Harry did not then desire that the visit should be
 repeated.
 
 Lord Alfred was to be at Humblethwaite on Christmas-eve. The
 emergencies of the Board at which he sat would not allow of an
 earlier absence from London. He was a man who shirked no official
 duty, and was afraid of no amount of work; and though he knew how
 great was the prize before him, he refused to leave his Board before
 the day had come at which his Board must necessarily dispense with
 his services. Between him and his father there had been no reticence,
 and it was clearly understood by him that he was to go down and win
 twenty thousand a year and the prettiest girl in Cumberland, if his
 own capacity that way, joined to all the favour of the girl's father
 and mother, would enable him to attain success. To Emily not a word
 more had been said on the subject than those which have been already
 narrated as having been spoken by the mother to the daughter. With
 all his authority, with all his love for his only remaining child,
 with all his consciousness of the terrible importance of the matter
 at issue, Sir Harry could not bring himself to suggest to his
 daughter that it would be well for her to fall in love with the guest
 who was coming to them. But to Lady Elizabeth he said very much. He
 had quite made up his mind that the thing would be good, and, having
 done so, he was very anxious that the arrangement should be made. It
 was natural that this girl of his should learn to love some youth;
 and how terrible was the danger of her loving amiss, when so much
 depended on her loving wisely! The whole fate of the House of Hotspur
 was in her hands,--to do with it as she thought fit! Sir Harry
 trembled as he reflected what would be the result were she to come to
 him some day and ask his favour for a suitor wholly unfitted to bear
 the name of Hotspur, and to sit on the throne of Humblethwaite and
 Scarrowby.
 
 "Is she pleased that he is coming?" he said to his wife, the evening
 before the arrival of their guest.
 
 "Certainly she is pleased. She knows that we both like him."
 
 "I remember when she used to talk about him--often," said Sir Harry.
 
 "That was when she was a child."
 
 "But a year or two ago," said Sir Harry.
 
 "Three or four years, perhaps; and with her that is a long time. It
 is not likely that she should talk much of him now. Of course she
 knows what it is that we wish."
 
 "Does she think about her cousin at all?" he said some hours
 afterwards.
 
 "Yes, she thinks of him. That is only natural, you know."
 
 "It would be unnatural that she should think of him much."
 
 "I do not see that," said the mother, keen to defend her daughter
 from what might seem to be an implied reproach. "George Hotspur is a
 man who will make himself thought of wherever he goes. He is clever,
 and very amusing;--there is no denying that. And then he has the
 Hotspur look all over."
 
 "I wish he had never set his foot within the house," said the father.
 
 "My dear, there is no such danger as you think," said Lady Elizabeth.
 "Emily is not a girl prone to fall in love at a moment's notice
 because a man is good-looking and amusing;--and certainly not with
 the conviction which she must have that her doing so would greatly
 grieve you." Sir Harry believed in his daughter, and said no more;
 but he thoroughly wished that Lord Alfred's wedding-day was fixed.
 
 "Mamma," said Emily, on the following day, "won't Lord Alfred be very
 dull?"
 
 "I hope not, my dear."
 
 "What is he to do, with nobody else here to amuse him?"
 
 "The Crutchleys are coming on the 27th."
 
 Now Mr. and Mrs. Crutchley were, as Emily thought, very ordinary
 people, and quite unlikely to afford amusement to Lord Alfred. Mr.
 Crutchley was an old gentleman of county standing, and with property
 in the county, living in a large dull red house in Penrith, of
 whom Sir Harry thought a good deal, because he was a gentleman who
 happened to have had great-grandfathers and great-grandmothers. But
 he was quite as old as Sir Harry, and Mrs. Crutchley was a great deal
 older than Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "What will Lord Alfred have to say to Mrs. Crutchley, mamma?"
 
 "What do people in society always have to say to each other? And the
 Lathebys are coming here to dine to-morrow, and will come again, I
 don't doubt, on the 27th."
 
 Mr. Latheby was the young Vicar of Humblethwaite, and Mrs. Latheby
 was a very pretty young bride whom he had just married.
 
 "And then Lord Alfred shoots," continued Lady Elizabeth.
 
 "Cousin George said that the shooting wasn't worth going after," said
 Emily, smiling. "Mamma, I fear it will be a failure." This made Lady
 Elizabeth unhappy, as she thought that more was meant than was really
 said. But she did not confide her fears to her husband.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER III.
 
 LORD ALFRED'S COURTSHIP.
 
 
 The Hall, as the great house at Humblethwaite was called, consisted
 in truth of various edifices added one to another at various periods;
 but the result was this, that no more picturesque mansion could be
 found in any part of England than the Hall at Humblethwaite. The
 oldest portion of it was said to be of the time of Henry VII.; but it
 may perhaps be doubted whether the set of rooms with lattice windows
 looking out on to the bowling-green, each window from beneath its
 own gable, was so old as the date assigned to it. It is strange how
 little authority can usually be found in family records to verify
 such statements. It was known that Humblethwaite and the surrounding
 manors had been given to, or in some fashion purchased by, a certain
 Harry Hotspur, who also in his day had been a knight, when Church
 lands were changing hands under Henry VIII. And there was authority
 to prove that that Sir Harry had done something towards making a
 home for himself on the spot; but whether those very gables were a
 portion of the building which the monks of St. Humble had raised for
 themselves in the preceding reign, may probably be doubted. That
 there were fragments of masonry, and parts of old timber, remaining
 from the monastery was probably true enough. The great body of the
 old house, as it now stood, had been built in the time of Charles
 II., and there was the date in the brickwork still conspicuous on the
 wall looking into the court. The hall and front door as it now stood,
 very prominent but quite at the end of the house, had been erected in
 the reign of Queen Anne, and the modern drawing-rooms with the best
 bedrooms over them, projecting far out into the modern gardens, had
 been added by the present baronet's father. The house was entirely
 of brick, and the old windows,--not the very oldest, the reader will
 understand, but those of the Caroline age,--were built with strong
 stone mullions, and were longer than they were deep, beauty of
 architecture having in those days been more regarded than light. Who
 does not know such windows, and has not declared to himself often
 how sad a thing it is that sanitary or scientific calculations
 should have banished the like of them from our houses? Two large
 oriel windows coming almost to the ground, and going up almost to
 the ceilings, adorned the dining-room and the library. From the
 drawing-rooms modern windows, opening on to a terrace, led into the
 garden.
 
 You entered the mansion by a court that was enclosed on two sides
 altogether, and on the two others partially. Facing you, as you drove
 in, was the body of the building, with the huge porch projecting on
 the right so as to give the appearance of a portion of the house
 standing out on that side. On the left was that old mythic Tudor
 remnant of the monastery, of which the back wall seen from the court
 was pierced only with a small window here and there, and was covered
 with ivy. Those lattice windows, from which Emily Hotspur loved to
 think that the monks of old had looked into their trim gardens, now
 looked on to a bowling-green which was kept very trim in honour of
 the holy personages who were supposed to have played there four
 centuries ago. Then, at the end of this old building, there had been
 erected kitchens, servants' offices, and various rooms, which turned
 the corner of the court in front, so that only one corner had, as
 it were, been left for ingress and egress. But the court itself was
 large, and in the middle of it there stood an old stone ornamental
 structure, usually called the fountain, but quite ignorant of water,
 loaded with griffins and satyrs and mermaids with ample busts, all
 overgrown with a green damp growth, which was scraped off by the
 joint efforts of the gardener and mason once perhaps in every five
 years.
 
 It often seems that the beauty of architecture is accidental. A great
 man goes to work with great means on a great pile, and makes a great
 failure. The world perceives that grace and beauty have escaped him,
 and that even magnificence has been hardly achieved. Then there grows
 up beneath various unknown hands a complication of stones and brick
 to the arrangement of which no great thought seems to have been
 given; and, lo, there is a thing so perfect in its glory that he who
 looks at it declares that nothing could be taken away and nothing
 added without injury and sacrilege and disgrace. So it had been, or
 rather so it was now, with the Hall at Humblethwaite. No rule ever
 made for the guidance of an artist had been kept. The parts were out
 of proportion. No two parts seemed to fit each other. Put it all on
 paper, and it was an absurdity. The huge hall and porch added on by
 the builder of Queen Anne's time, at the very extremity of the house,
 were almost a monstrosity. The passages and staircases, and internal
 arrangements, were simply ridiculous. But there was not a portion
 of the whole interior that did not charm; nor was there a corner of
 the exterior, nor a yard of an outside wall, that was not in itself
 eminently beautiful.
 
 Lord Alfred Gresley, as he was driven into the court in the early
 dusk of a winter evening, having passed through a mile and a half
 of such park scenery as only Cumberland and Westmoreland can show,
 was fully alive to the glories of the place. Humblethwaite did not
 lie among the lakes,--was, indeed, full ten miles to the north of
 Keswick; but it was so placed that it enjoyed the beauty and the
 luxury of mountains and rivers, without the roughness of unmanageable
 rocks, or the sterility and dampness of moorland. Of rocky fragments,
 indeed, peeping out through the close turf, and here and there coming
 forth boldly so as to break the park into little depths, with now and
 again a real ravine, there were plenty. And there ran right across
 the park, passing so near the Hall as to require a stone bridge in
 the very flower-garden, the Caldbeck, as bright and swift a stream
 as ever took away the water from neighbouring mountains. And to the
 south of Humblethwaite there stood the huge Skiddaw, and Saddleback
 with its long gaunt ridge; while to the west, Brockleband Fell seemed
 to encircle the domain. Lord Alfred, as he was driven up through the
 old trees, and saw the deer peering at him from the knolls and broken
 fragments of stone, felt that he need not envy his elder brother if
 only his lines might fall to him in this very pleasant place.
 
 He had known Humblethwaite before; and, irrespective of all its
 beauties, and of the wealth of the Hotspurs, was quite willing to
 fall in love with Emily Hotspur. That a man with such dainties
 offered to him should not become greedy, that there should be no
 touch of avarice when such wealth was shown to him, is almost more
 than we may dare to assert. But Lord Alfred was a man not specially
 given to covetousness. He had recognized it as his duty as a man not
 to seek for these things unless he could in truth love the woman who
 held them in her hands to give. But as he looked round him through
 the gloaming of the evening, he thought that he remembered that Emily
 Hotspur was all that was loveable.
 
 But, reader, we must not linger long over Lord Alfred's love. A few
 words as to the father, a few as to the daughter, and a few also as
 to the old house where they dwelt together, it has been necessary to
 say; but this little love story of Lord Alfred's,--if it ever was a
 love story,--must be told very shortly.
 
 He remained five weeks at Humblethwaite, and showed himself willing
 to receive amusement from old Mrs. Crutchley and from young Mrs.
 Latheby. The shooting was quite good enough for him, and he won
 golden opinions from every one about the place. He made himself
 acquainted with the whole history of the house, and was prepared to
 prove to demonstration that Henry VII.'s monks had looked out of
 those very windows, and had played at bowls on that very green. Emily
 became fond of him after a fashion, but he failed to assume any
 aspect of divinity in her eyes.
 
 Of the thing to be done, neither father nor mother said a word to
 the girl; and she, though she knew so well that the doing of it was
 intended, said not a word to her mother.