
 
 She did not conceal from herself that there might be trouble with her
 father. And yet she was not sure but that upon the whole he would be
 pleased after a while. Humblethwaite and the family honours would
 still go together, if he would sanction this marriage; and she knew
 how he longed in his heart that it might be so. For a time probably
 he might be averse to her prayers. Should it be so, she would simply
 give him her word that she would never during his lifetime marry
 without his permission,--and then she would be true to her troth. As
 to her truth in that respect there could be no doubt. She had given
 her word; and that, for a Hotspur, must be enough.
 
 She could not talk as she thought of all this, and therefore had
 hardly spoken when George appeared at the carriage door to give the
 ladies a hand as they came into the house. To her he was able to give
 one gentle pressure as she passed on; but she did not speak to him,
 nor was it necessary that she should do so. Had not everything been
 said already?
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER IX.
 
 "I KNOW WHAT YOU ARE."
 
 
 The scene which took place that night between the mother and daughter
 may be easily conceived. Emily told her tale, and told it in a manner
 which left no doubt of her persistency. She certainly meant it. Lady
 Elizabeth had almost expected it. There are evils which may come or
 may not; but as to which, though we tell ourselves that they may
 still be avoided, we are inwardly almost sure that they will come.
 Such an evil in the mind of Lady Elizabeth had been Cousin George.
 Not but what she herself would have liked him for a son-in-law had it
 not been so certain that he was a black sheep.
 
 "Your father will never consent to it, my dear."
 
 "Of course, Mamma, I shall do nothing unless he does."
 
 "You will have to give him up."
 
 "No, Mamma, not that; that is beyond what Papa can demand of me. I
 shall not give him up, but I certainly shall not marry him without
 Papa's consent, or yours."
 
 "Nor see him?"
 
 "Well; if he does not come I cannot see him."
 
 "Nor correspond with him?"
 
 "Certainly not, if Papa forbids it."
 
 After that, Lady Elizabeth did give way to a considerable extent.
 She did not tell her daughter that she considered it at all probable
 that Sir Harry would yield; but she made it to be understood that
 she herself would do so if Sir Harry would be persuaded. And she
 acknowledged that the amount of obedience promised by Emily was all
 that could be expected. "But, Mamma," said Emily, before she left her
 mother, "do you not know that you love him yourself?"
 
 "Love is such a strong word, my dear."
 
 "It is not half strong enough," said Emily, pressing her two hands
 together. "But you do, Mamma?"
 
 "I think he is very agreeable, certainly."
 
 "And handsome?--only that goes for nothing."
 
 "Yes, he is a fine-looking man."
 
 "And clever? I don't know how it is; let there be who there may in
 the room, he is always the best talker."
 
 "He knows how to talk, certainly."
 
 "And, Mamma, don't you think that there is a something,--I don't know
 what,--something not at all like other men about him that compels
 one to love him? Oh, Mamma, do say something nice to me! To me he is
 everything that a man should be."
 
 "I wish he were, my dear."
 
 "As for the sort of life he has been leading, spending more money
 than he ought, and all that kind of thing, he has promised to reform
 it altogether; and he is doing it now. At any rate, you must admit,
 Mamma, that he is not false."
 
 "I hope not, my dear."
 
 "Why do you speak in that way, Mamma? Does he talk like a man that
 is false? Have you ever known him to be false? Don't be prejudiced,
 Mamma, at any rate."
 
 The reader will understand that when the daughter had brought her
 mother as far as this, the elder lady was compelled to say "something
 nice" at last. At any rate there was a loving embrace between them,
 and an understanding that the mother would not exaggerate the
 difficulties of the position either by speech or word.
 
 "Of course you will have to see your papa to-morrow morning," Lady
 Elizabeth said.
 
 "George will tell him everything to-night," said Emily. She as she
 went to her bed did not doubt but what the difficulties would melt.
 Luckily for her,--so luckily!--it happened that her lover possessed
 by his very birth a right which, beyond all other possessions, would
 recommend him to her father. And then had not the man himself all
 natural good gifts to recommend him? Of course he had not money or
 property, but she had, or would have, property; and of all men alive
 her father was the least disposed to be greedy. As she half thought
 of it and half dreamt of it in her last waking moments of that
 important day, she was almost altogether happy. It was so sweet to
 know that she possessed the love of him whom she loved better than
 all the world beside.
 
 Cousin George did not have quite so good a time of it that night. The
 first thing he did on his return from Ulleswater to Humblethwaite
 was to write a line to his friend Lady Altringham. This had been
 promised, and he did so before he had seen Sir Harry.
 
 
    DEAR LADY A.--I have been successful with my younger
    cousin. She is the bonniest, and the best, and the
    brightest girl that ever lived, and I am the happiest
    fellow. But I have not as yet seen the Baronet. I am to do
    so to-night, and will report progress to-morrow. I doubt I
    shan't find him so bonny and so good and so bright. But,
    as you say, the young birds ought to be too strong for the
    old ones.--Yours most sincerely,
 
    G. H.
 
 
 This was written while he was dressing, and was put into the
 letter-box by himself as he came downstairs. It was presumed that the
 party had dined at the Falls; but there was "a tea" prepared for them
 on an extensive scale. Sir Harry, suspecting nothing, was happy and
 almost jovial with Mr. Fitzpatrick and the two young ladies. Emily
 said hardly a word. Lady Elizabeth, who had not as yet been told, but
 already suspected something, was very anxious. George was voluble,
 witty, and perhaps a little too loud. But as the lad who was going
 to Oxford, and who had drank a good deal of champagne and was now
 drinking sherry, was loud also, George's manner was not specially
 observed. It was past ten before they got up from the table, and
 nearly eleven before George was able to whisper a word to the
 Baronet. He almost shirked it for that night, and would have done so
 had he not remembered how necessary it was that Emily should know
 that his pluck was good. Of course she would be asked to abandon him.
 Of course she would be told that it was her duty to give him up. Of
 course she would give him up unless he could get such a hold upon her
 heart as to make her doing so impossible to her. She would have to
 learn that he was an unprincipled spendthrift,--nay worse than that,
 as he hardly scrupled to tell himself. But he need not weight his own
 character with the further burden of cowardice. The Baronet could
 not eat him, and he would not be afraid of the Baronet. "Sir Harry,"
 he whispered, "could you give me a minute or two before we go to
 bed?" Sir Harry started as though he had been stung, and looked his
 cousin sharply in the face without answering him. George kept his
 countenance, and smiled.
 
 "I won't keep you long," he said.
 
 "You had better come to my room," said Sir Harry, gruffly, and
 led the way into his own sanctum. When there, he sat down in his
 accustomed arm-chair without offering George a seat, but George soon
 found a seat for himself. "And now what is it?" said Sir Harry, with
 his blackest frown.
 
 "I have asked my cousin to be my wife."
 
 "What! Emily?"
 
 "Yes, Emily; and she has consented. I now ask for your approval." We
 must give Cousin George his due, and acknowledge that he made his
 little request exactly as he would have done had he been master of
 ten thousand a year of his own, quite unencumbered.
 
 "What right had you, sir, to speak to her without coming to me
 first?"
 
 "One always does, I think, go to the girl first," said George.
 
 "You have disgraced yourself, sir, and outraged my hospitality. You
 are no gentleman!"
 
 "Sir Harry, that is strong language."
 
 "Strong! Of course it is strong. I mean it to be strong. I shall make
 it stronger yet if you attempt to say another word to her."
 
 "Look here, Sir Harry, I am bound to bear a good deal from you, but I
 have a right to explain."
 
 "You have a right, sir, to go away from this, and go away you shall."
 
 "Sir Harry, you have told me that I am not a gentleman."
 
 "You have abused my kindness to you. What right have you, who have
 not a shilling in the world, to speak to my daughter? I won't have
 it, and let that be an end of it. I won't have it. And I must desire
 that you will leave Humblethwaite to-morrow. I won't have it."
 
 "It is quite true that I have not a shilling."
 
 "Then what business have you to speak to my daughter?"
 
 "Because I have that which is worth many shillings, and which you
 value above all your property. I am the heir to your name and title.
 When you are gone, I must be the head of this family. I do not in the
 least quarrel with you for choosing to leave your property to your
 own child, but I have done the best I could to keep the property and
 the title together. I love my cousin."
 
 "I don't believe in your love, sir."
 
 "If that is all, I do not doubt but that I can satisfy you."
 
 "It is not all; and it is not half all. And it isn't because you are
 a pauper. You know it all as well as I do, without my telling you,
 but you drive me to tell you."
 
 "Know what, sir?"
 
 "Though you hadn't a shilling, you should have had her if you could
 win her,--had your life been even fairly decent. The title must go to
 you,--worse luck for the family. You can talk well enough, and what
 you say is true. I would wish that they should go together."
 
 "Of course it will be better."
 
 "But, sir,--" then Sir Henry paused.
 
 "Well, Sir Harry?"
 
 "You oblige me to speak out. You are such a one, that I do not dare
 to let you have my child. Your life is so bad, that I should not be
 justified in doing so for any family purpose. You would break her
 heart."
 
 "You wrong me there, altogether."
 
 "You are a gambler."
 
 "I have been, Sir Harry."
 
 "And a spendthrift?"
 
 "Well--yes; as long as I had little or nothing to spend."
 
 "I believe you are over head and ears in debt now, in spite of the
 assistance you have had from me within twelve months."
 
 Cousin George remembered the advice which had been given him, that
 he should conceal nothing from his cousin. "I do owe some money
 certainly," he said.
 
 "And how do you mean to pay it?"
 
 "Well--if I marry Emily, I suppose that--you will pay it."
 
 "That's cool, at any rate."
 
 "What can I say, Sir Harry?"
 
 "I would pay it all, though it were to half the property--"
 
 "Less than a year's income would clear off every shilling I owe, Sir
 Harry."
 
 "Listen to me, sir. Though it were ten years' income, I would pay it
 all, if I thought that the rest would be kept with the title, and
 that my girl would be happy."
 
 "I will make her happy."
 
 "But, sir, it is not only that you are a gambler and spendthrift,
 and an unprincipled debtor without even a thought of paying. You are
 worse than this. There;--I am not going to call you names. I know
 what you are, and you shall not have my daughter."
 
 George Hotspur found himself compelled to think for a few moments
 before he could answer a charge so vague, and yet, as he knew, so
 well founded. Nevertheless he felt that he was progressing. His debts
 would not stand in his way, if only he could make this rich father
 believe that in other matters his daughter would not be endangered by
 the marriage. "I don't quite know what you mean, Sir Harry. I am not
 going to defend myself. I have done much of which I am ashamed. I was
 turned very young upon the world, and got to live with rich people
 when I was myself poor. I ought to have withstood the temptation,
 but I didn't, and I got into bad hands. I don't deny it. There is a
 horrid Jew has bills of mine now."
 
 "What have you done with that five thousand pounds?"
 
 "He had half of it; and I had to settle for the last Leger, which
 went against me."
 
 "It is all gone?"
 
 "Pretty nearly. I don't pretend but what I have been very reckless as
 to money; I am ready to tell you the truth about everything. I don't
 say that I deserve her; but I do say this,--that I should not have
 thought of winning her, in my position, had it not been for the
 title. Having that in my favour I do not think that I was misbehaving
 to you in proposing to her. If you will trust me now, I will be as
 grateful and obedient a son as any man ever had."
 
 He had pleaded his cause well, and he knew it. Sir Harry also felt
 that his cousin had made a better case than he would have believed
 to be possible. He was quite sure that the man was a scamp, utterly
 untrustworthy, and yet the man's pleading for himself had been
 efficacious. He sat silent for full five minutes before he spoke
 again, and then he gave judgment as follows: "You will go away
 without seeing her to-morrow."
 
 "If you wish it."
 
 "And you will not write to her."
 
 "Only a line."
 
 "Not a word," said Sir Harry, imperiously.
 
 "Only a line, which I will give open to you. You can do with it as
 you please."
 
 "And as you have forced upon me the necessity, I shall make inquiries
 in London as to your past life. I have heard things which perhaps may
 be untrue."
 
 "What things, Sir Harry?"
 
 "I shall not demean myself or injure you by repeating them, unless
 I find cause to believe they are true. I do believe that the result
 will be such as to make me feel that in justice to my girl I cannot
 allow you to become her husband. I tell you so fairly. Should the
 debts you owe be simple debts, not dishonourably contracted, I will
 pay them."
 
 "And then she shall be mine?"
 
 "I will make no such promise. You had better go now. You can have
 the carriage to Penrith as early as you please in the morning; or to
 Carlisle if you choose to go north. I will make your excuses to Lady
 Elizabeth. Good night."
 
 Cousin George stood for a second in doubt, and then shook hands with
 the Baronet. He reached Penrith the next morning soon after ten, and
 breakfasted alone at the hotel.
 
 There were but very few words spoken on the occasion between the
 father and daughter, but Emily did succeed in learning pretty nearly
 the truth of what had taken place. On the Monday her mother gave her
 the following note:--
 
 
    DEAREST,--At your father's bidding, I have gone suddenly.
    You will understand why I have done so. I shall try to do
    just as he would have me; but you will, I know, be quite
    sure that I should never give you up.--Yours for ever and
    ever,
 
    G. H.
 
 
 The father had thought much of it, and at last had determined that
 Emily should have the letter.
 
 In the course of the week there came other guests to Humblethwaite,
 and it so chanced that there was a lady who knew the Altringhams,
 who had unfortunately met the Altringhams at Goodwood, and who, most
 unfortunately, stated in Emily's hearing that she had seen George
 Hotspur at Goodwood.
 
 "He was not there," said Emily, quite boldly.
 
 "Oh, yes; with the Altringhams, as usual. He is always with them at
 Goodwood."
 
 "He was not at the last meeting," said Emily, smiling.
 
 The lady said nothing till her lord was present, and then appealed to
 him. "Frank, didn't you see George Hotspur with the Altringhams at
 Goodwood, last July?"
 
 "To be sure I did, and lost a pony to him on Eros."
 
 The lady looked at Emily, who said nothing further; but she was still
 quite convinced that George Hotspur had not been at those Goodwood
 races.
 
 It is so hard, when you have used a lie commodiously, to bury it, and
 get well rid of it.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER X.
 
 MR. HART AND CAPTAIN STUBBER.
 
 
 When George Hotspur left Humblethwaite, turned out of the house
 by the angry Baronet early in the morning,--as the reader will
 remember,--he was at his own desire driven to Penrith, choosing to
 go south rather than north. He had doubted for a while as to his
 immediate destination. The Altringhams were still at Castle Corry,
 and he might have received great comfort from her ladyship's advice
 and encouragement. But, intimate as he was with the Altringhams, he
 did not dare to take a liberty with the Earl. A certain allowance of
 splendid hospitality at Castle Corry was at his disposal every year,
 and Lord Altringham always welcomed him with thorough kindness. But
 George Hotspur had in some fashion been made to understand that he
 was not to overstay his time; and he was quite aware that the Earl
 could be very disagreeable upon occasions. There was a something in
 the Earl of which George was afraid; and, to tell the truth, he did
 not dare to go back to Castle Corry. And then, might it not be well
 for him to make immediate preparation in London for those inquiries
 respecting his debts and his character which Sir Harry had decided
 to make? It would be very difficult for him to make any preparation
 that could lead to a good result; but if no preparation were made,
 the result would be very bad indeed. It might perhaps be possible
 to do something with Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber. He had no other
 immediate engagements. In October he was due to shoot pheasants with
 a distinguished party in Norfolk, but this business which he had now
 in hand was of so much importance that even the pheasant-shooting and
 the distinguished party were not of much moment to him.
 
 He went to Penrith, and thence direct to London. It was the habit of
 his life to give up his London lodgings when he left town at the end
 of the season, and spare himself the expense of any home as long as
 he could find friends to entertain him. There are certain items of
 the cost of living for which the greatest proficient in the art of
 tick must pay, or he will come to a speedy end;--and a man's lodging
 is one of them. If indeed the spendthrift adapts himself to the
 splendour of housekeeping, he may, provided his knowledge of his
 business be complete, and his courage adequate, house himself
 gloriously for a year or two with very small payment in ready money.
 He may even buy a mansion with an incredibly small outlay, and, when
 once in it, will not easily allow himself to be extruded. George
 Hotspur, however, not from any want of knowledge or of audacity, but
 from the nature of the life he chose to lead, had abstained from such
 investment of his credit, and had paid for his lodgings in St. James'
 Street. He was consequently houseless at the moment, and on his
 arrival in London took himself to an hotel close behind the military
 club to which he belonged.
 
 At this moment he was comparatively a rich man. He had between three
 and four hundred pounds at a bank at which he kept an account when
 possessed of funds. But demands upon him were very pressing, and
 there was a certain Captain Stubber who was bitter against him,
 almost to blood, because one Mr. Abraham Hart had received two
 thousand pounds from the proceeds of Sir Harry's generosity. Captain
 Stubber had not received a shilling, and had already threatened
 Cousin George with absolute exposure if something were not done to
 satisfy him.
 
 George, when he had ordered his dinner at his club, wrote the
 following letter to Lady Altringham. He had intended to write from
 Penrith in the morning, but when there had been out of sorts and
 unhappy, and had disliked to confess, after his note of triumph
 sounded on the previous evening, that he had been turned out of
 Humblethwaite. He had got over that feeling during the day, with
 the help of sundry glasses of sherry and a little mixed curaçoa and
 brandy which he took immediately on his arrival in London,--and, so
 supported, made a clean breast of it, as the reader shall see.
 
 
    DEAR LADY A., [he said]--Here I am, back in town, banished
    from heaven. My darling, gentle, future papa-in-law
    gave me to understand, when I told him the extent of my
    hopes last night, that the outside of the park-gates at
    Humblethwaite was the place for me; nevertheless he sent
    me to Penrith with the family horses, and, taking it as
    a whole, I think that my interview with him, although
    very disagreeable, was not unsatisfactory. I told him
    everything that I could tell him. He was kind enough to
    call me a blackguard (!!!) because I had gone to Emily
    without speaking to him first. On such occasions, however,
    a man takes anything. I ventured to suggest that what I
    had done was not unprecedented among young people, and
    hinted that while he could make me the future master of
    Humblethwaite, I could make my cousin the future Lady
    Hotspur; and that in no other way could Humblethwaite and
    the Hotspurs be kept together. It was wonderful how he
    cooled down after a while, saying that he would pay all my
    debts if he found them--satisfactory. I can only say that
    I never found them so.
 
    It ended in this--that he is to make inquiry about me, and
    that I am to have my cousin unless I am found out to be
    very bad indeed. How or when the inquiries will be made I
    do not know; but I am here to prepare for them.
 
    Yours always most faithfully,
 
    G. H.
 
    I do not like to ask Altringham to do anything for me. No
    man ever had a kinder friend than I have had in him, and
    I know he objects to meddle in the money matters of other
    people. But if he could lend me his name for a thousand
    pounds till I can get these things settled, I believe
    I could get over every other difficulty. I should as a
    matter of course include the amount in the list of debts
    which I should give to Sir Harry; but the sum at once,
    which I could raise on his name without trouble to him,
    would enable me to satisfy the only creditor who will be
    likely to do me real harm with Sir Harry. I think you
    will understand all this, and will perceive how very
    material the kindness to me may be; but if you think that
    Altringham will be unwilling to do it, you had better not
    show him this letter.
 
 
 It was the mixed curaçoa and brandy which gave George Hotspur the
 courage to make the request contained in his postscript. He had not
 intended to make it when he sat down to write, but as he wrote the
 idea had struck him that if ever a man ought to use a friend this was
 an occasion for doing so. If he could get a thousand pounds from Lord
 Altringham, he might be able to stop Captain Stubber's mouth. He did
 not believe that he should be successful, and he thought it probable
 that Lord Altringham might express vehement displeasure. But the
 game was worth the candle, and then he knew that he could trust the
 Countess.
 
 London was very empty, and he passed a wretched evening at his club.
 There were not men enough to make up a pool, and he was obliged to
 content himself with a game of billiards with an old half-pay naval
 captain, who never left London, and who would bet nothing beyond
 a shilling on the game. The half-pay navy captain won four games,
 thereby paying for his dinner, and then Cousin George went sulkily to
 bed.
 
 He had come up to town expressly to see Captain Stubber and Mr. Hart,
 and perhaps also to see another friend from whom some advice might
 be had; but on the following morning he found himself very averse to
 seeking any of these advisers. He had applied to Lady Altringham for
 assistance, and he told himself that it would be wise to wait for her
 answer. And yet he knew that it would not be wise to wait, as Sir
 Harry would certainly be quick in making his promised inquiries. For
 four days he hung about between his hotel and his club, and then he
 got Lady Altringham's answer. We need only quote the passage which
 had reference to George's special request:--
 
 
    Gustavus says that he will have nothing to do with money.
    You know his feelings about it. And he says that it would
    do no good. Whatever the debts are, tell them plainly to
    Sir Harry. If this be some affair of play, as Gustavus
    supposes, tell that to Sir Harry. Gustavus thinks that the
    Baronet would without doubt pay any such debt which could
    be settled or partly settled by a thousand pounds.
 
 
 "D----d heartless, selfish fellow! quite incapable of anything like
 true friendship," said Cousin George to himself, when he read Lady
 Altringham's letter.
 
 Now he must do something. Hitherto neither Stubber, nor Hart, nor the
 other friend knew of his presence in London. Hart, though a Jew, was
 much less distasteful to him than Captain Stubber, and to Mr. Abraham
 Hart he went first.
 
 Mr. Abraham Hart was an attorney,--so called by himself and
 friends,--living in a genteel street abutting on Gray's Inn Road,
 with whose residence and place of business, all beneath the same
 roof, George Hotspur was very well acquainted. Mr. Hart was a man
 in the prime of life, with black hair and a black beard, and a new
 shining hat, and a coat with a velvet collar and silk lining. He was
 always dressed in the same way, and had never yet been seen by Cousin
 George without his hat on his head. He was a pleasant-spoken, very
 ignorant, smiling, jocose man, with a slightly Jewish accent, who
 knew his business well, pursued it diligently, and considered himself
 to have a clear conscience. He had certain limits of forbearance
 with his customers--limits which were not narrow; but, when those
 were passed, he would sell the bed from under a dying woman with her
 babe, or bread from the mouth of a starving child. To do so was the
 necessity of his trade,--for his own guidance in which he had made
 laws. The breaking of those laws by himself would bring his trade to
 an end, and therefore he declined to break them.
 
 Mr. Hart was a man who attended to his business, and he was found at
 home even in September. "Yes, Mr. 'Oshspur, it's about time something
 was done now; ain't it?" said Mr. Hart, smiling pleasantly.
 
 Cousin George, also smiling, reminded his friend of the two thousand
 pounds paid to him only a few months since. "Not a shilling was
 mine of that, Captain 'Oshspur, not a brass fardin'. That was quite
 neshesshary just then, as you know, Captain 'Oshspur, or the fat must
 have been in the fire. And what's up now?"
 
 Not without considerable difficulty Cousin George explained to the
 Jew gentleman what was "up." He probably assumed more inclination on
 the part of Sir Harry for the match than he was justified in doing;
 but was very urgent in explaining to Mr. Hart that when inquiry was
 made on the part of Sir Harry as to the nature of the debt, the naked
 truth should not be exactly told.
 
 "It was very bad, vasn't it, Captain 'Oshspur, having to divide with
 that fellow Stubber the money from the 'Orse Guards? You vas too
 clever for both of us there, Mr. 'Oshspur; veren't you now, Captain
 'Oshspur? And I've two cheques still on my 'ands which is marked 'No
 account!' 'No account' is very bad. Isn't 'No account' very bad on
 a cheque, Captain 'Oshspur? And then I've that cheque on Drummond,
 signed;--God knows how that is signed! There ain't no such person
 at all. Baldebeque! That's more like it than nothing else. When you
 brought me that, I thought there vas a Lord Baldebeque; and I know
 you live among lords, Captain 'Oshspur."
 
 "On my honour I brought it you,--just as I took it at Tattersall's."
 
 "There was an expert as I showed it to says it is your handwriting,
 Captain 'Oshspur."
 
 "He lies!" said Cousin George, fiercely.
 
 "But when Stubber would have half the sale money, for the
 commission--and wanted it all too! lord, how he did curse and swear!
 That was bad, Captain 'Oshspur."
 
 Then Cousin George swallowed his fierceness for a time, and proceeded
 to explain to Mr. Hart that Sir Harry would certainly pay all his
 debts if only those little details could be kept back to which Mr.
 Hart had so pathetically alluded. Above all it would be necessary to
 preserve in obscurity that little mistake which had been made as to
 the pawning of the commission. Cousin George told a great many lies,
 but he told also much that was true. The Jew did not believe one of
 the lies; but then, neither did he believe much of the truth. When
 George had finished his story, then Mr. Hart had a story of his own
 to tell.
 
 "To let you know all about it, Captain 'Oshspur, the old gent has
 begun about it already."
 
 "What, Sir Harry?"
 
 "Yes, Sir 'Arry. Mr. Boltby--"
 
 "He's the family lawyer."
 
 "I suppose so, Captain 'Oshspur. Vell, he vas here yesterday, and vas
 very polite. If I'd just tell him all about everything, he thought
 as 'ow the Baronet would settle the affair off 'and. He vas very
 generous in his offer, vas Mr. Boltby; but he didn't say nothin' of
 any marriage, Captain 'Oshspur."
 
 "Of course he didn't. You are not such a fool as to suppose he
 would."
 
 "No; I ain't such a fool as I looks, Captain Oshspur, am I? I didn't
 think it likely, seeing vat vas the nature of his interrogatories.
 Mr. Boltby seemed to know a good deal. It is astonishing how much
 them fellows do know."
 
 "You didn't tell him anything?"
 
 "Not much, Captain 'Oshspur--not at fust starting. I'm a going to
 have my money, you know, Captain 'Oshspur. And if I see my vay to my
 money one vay, and if I don't see no vay the other vay, vy, vhat's
 a man to do? You can't blame me, Captain 'Oshspur. I've been very
 indulgent with you; I have, Captain 'Oshspur."
 
 Cousin George promised, threatened, explained, swore by all his
 gods, and ended by assuring Mr. Abraham Hart that his life and death
 were in that gentleman's keeping. If Mr. Hart would only not betray
 him, the money would be safe and the marriage would be safe, and
 everything would easily come right. Over and above other things,
 Cousin George would owe to Mr. Abraham Hart a debt of gratitude which
 never would be wholly paid. Mr. Hart could only say that he meant to
 have his money, but that he did not mean to be "ungenteel." Much in
 his opinion must depend on what Stubber would do. As for Stubber,
 he couldn't speak to Stubber himself, as he and Stubber "were two."
 As for himself, if he could get his money he certainly would not be
 "ungenteel." And he meant what he said--meant more than he said. He
 would still run some risk rather than split on an old customer such
 as "Captain 'Oshspur." But now that a sudden way to his money was
 opened to him, he could not undertake to lose sight of it.
 
 With a very heavy heart Cousin George went from Mr. Hart's house to
 the house of call of Captain Stubber. Mr. Boltby had been before him
 with Hart, and he augured the worst from Sir Harry's activity in the
 matter. If Mr. Boltby had already seen the Captain, all his labour
 would probably be too late. Where Captain Stubber lived, even so
 old a friend of his as Cousin George did not know. And in what way
 Captain Stubber had become a captain, George, though he had been a
 military man himself, had never learned. But Captain Stubber had a
 house of call in a very narrow, dirty little street near Red Lion
 Square. It was close to a public-house, but did not belong to the
 public-house. George Hotspur, who had been very often to the place
 of call, had never seen there any appurtenances of the Captain's
 business. There were no account-books, no writing-table, no ink even,
 except that contained in a little box with a screw, which Captain
 Stubber would take out of his own pocket. Mr. Hart was so far
 established and civilized as to keep a boy whom he called a clerk;
 but Captain Stubber seemed to keep nothing. A dirty little girl at
 the house of call would run and fetch Captain Stubber, if he were
 within reach; but most usually an appointment had to be made with
 the Captain. Cousin George well remembered the day when his brother
 Captain first made his acquaintance. About two years after the
 commencement of his life in London, Captain Stubber had had an
 interview with him in the little waiting-room just within the club
 doors. Captain Stubber then had in his possession a trumpery note of
 hand with George's signature, which, as he stated, he had "done" for
 a small tradesman with whom George had been fool enough to deal for
 cigars. From that day to the present he and Captain Stubber had been
 upon most intimate and confidential terms. If there was any one in
 the world whom Cousin George really hated, it was Captain Stubber.
 
 On this occasion Captain Stubber was forthcoming after a delay of
 about a quarter of an hour. During that time Cousin George had stood
 in the filthy little parlour of the house of call in a frame of mind
 which was certainly not to be envied. Had Mr. Boltby also been with
 Captain Stubber? He knew his two creditors well enough to understand
 that the Jew, getting his money, would be better pleased to serve
 him than to injure him. But the Captain would from choice do him an
 ill turn. Nothing but self-interest would tie up Captain Stubber's
 tongue. Captain Stubber was a tall thin gentleman, probably over
 sixty years of age, with very seedy clothes, and a red nose. He
 always had Berlin gloves, very much torn about the fingers, carried
 a cotton umbrella, wore--as his sole mark of respectability--a very
 stiff, clean, white collar round his neck, and invariably smelt of
 gin. No one knew where he lived, or how he carried on his business;
 but, such as he was, he had dealings with large sums of money, or at
 least with bills professing to stand for large sums, and could never
 have been found without a case in his pocket crammed with these
 documents. The quarter of an hour seemed to George to be an age; but
 at last Captain Stubber knocked at the front door and was shown into
 the room.
 
 "How d'ye do, Captain Stubber?" said George.
 
 "I'd do a deal better, Captain Hotspur, if I found it easier
 sometimes to come by my own."
 
 "Well, yes; but no doubt you have your profit in the delay, Captain
 Stubber."
 
 "It's nothing to you, Captain Hotspur, whether I have profit or loss.
 All you 'as got to look to is to pay me what you owe me. And I intend
 that you shall, or by G---- you shall suffer for it! I'm not going to
 stand it any longer. I know where to have you, and have you I will."
 
 Cousin George was not quite sure whether the Captain did know where
 to have him. If Mr. Boltby had been with him, it might be so; but
 then Captain Stubber was not a man so easily found as Mr. Hart, and
 the connection between himself and the Captain might possibly have
 escaped Mr. Boltby's inquiries. It was very difficult to tell the
 story of his love to such a man as Captain Stubber, but he did tell
 it. He explained all the difficulties of Sir Harry's position in
 regard to the title and the property, and he was diffuse upon his own
 advantages as head of the family, and of the need there was that he
 should marry the heiress.
 
 "But there is not an acre of it will come to you unless he gives it
 you?" inquired Captain Stubber.
 
 "Certainly not," said Cousin George, anxious that the Captain should
 understand the real facts of the case to a certain extent.
 
 "And he needn't give you the girl?"
 
 "The girl will give herself, my friend."
 
 "And he needn't give the girl the property?"
 
 "But he will. She is his only child."
 
 "I don't believe a word about it. I don't believe such a one as Sir
 Harry Hotspur would lift his hand to help such as you."
 
 "He has offered to pay my debts already."
 
 "Very well. Let him make the offer to me. Look here, Captain Hotspur,
 I am not a bit afraid of you, you know."
 
 "Who asks you to be afraid?"
 
 "Of all the liars I ever met with, you are the worst."
 
 George Hotspur smiled, looking up at the red nose of the malignant
 old man as though it were a joke; but that which he had to hear at
 this moment was a heavy burden. Captain Stubber probably understood
 this, for he repeated his words.
 
 "I never knew any liar nigh so bad as you. And then there is such a
 deal worse than lies. I believe I could send you to penal servitude,
 Captain Hotspur."
 
 "You could do no such thing," said Cousin George, still trying to
 look as though it were a joke, "and you don't think you could."
 
 "I'll do my best at any rate, if I don't have my money soon. You
 could pay Mr. Hart two thousand pounds, but you think I'm nobody."
 
 "I am making arrangements now for having every shilling paid to you."
 
 "Yes, I see. I've known a good deal about your arrangements. Look
 here, Captain Hotspur, unless I have five hundred pounds on or before
 Saturday, I'll write to Sir Harry Hotspur, and I'll give him a
 statement of all our dealings. You can trust me, though I can't trust
 you. Good morning, Captain Hotspur."
 
 Captain Stubber did believe in his heart that he was a man much
 injured by Cousin George, and that Cousin George was one whom he was
 entitled to despise. And yet a poor wretch more despicable, more
 dishonest, more false, more wicked, or more cruel than Captain
 Stubber could not have been found in all London. His business
 was carried on with a small capital borrowed from a firm of low
 attorneys, who were the real holders of the bills he carried, and the
 profits which they allowed him to make were very trifling. But from
 Cousin George during the last twelve months he had made no profit at
 all. And Cousin George in former days had trodden upon him as on a
 worm.
 
 Cousin George did not fail to perceive that Mr. Boltby had not as yet
 applied to Captain Stubber.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER XI.
 
 MRS. MORTON.
 
 
 Five hundred pounds before Saturday, and this was Tuesday! As Cousin
 George was taken westward from Red Lion Square in a cab, three or
 four different lines of conduct suggested themselves to him. In the
 first place, it would be a very good thing to murder Captain Stubber.
 In the present effeminate state of civilization and with the existing
 scruples as to the value of human life, he did not see his way
 clearly in this direction, but entertained the project rather as a
 beautiful castle in the air. The two next suggestions were to pay him
 the money demanded, or to pay him half of it. The second suggestion
 was the simpler, as the state of Cousin George's funds made it
 feasible; but then that brute would probably refuse to take the half
 in lieu of the whole when he found that his demand had absolutely
 produced a tender of ready cash. As for paying the whole, it might
 perhaps be done. It was still possible that, with such prospects
 before him as those he now possessed, he could raise a hundred or
 hundred and fifty pounds; but then he would be left penniless. The
 last course of action which he contemplated was, to take no further
 notice of Captain Stubber, and let him tell his story to Sir Harry if
 he chose to tell it. The man was such a blackguard that his entire
 story would probably not be believed; and then was it not almost
 necessary that Sir Harry should hear it? Of course there would be
 anger, and reproaches, and threats, and difficulty. But if Emily
 would be true to him, they might all by degrees be levelled down.
 This latter line of conduct would be practicable, and had this
 beautiful attraction,--that it would save for his own present use
 that charming balance of ready money which he still possessed. Had
 Altringham possessed any true backbone of friendship, he might now,
 he thought, have been triumphant over all his difficulties.
 
 When he sat down to his solitary dinner at his club, he was very
 tired with his day's work. Attending to the affairs of such gentlemen
 as Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber,--who well know how to be masterful
 when their time for being masterful has come,--is fatiguing enough.
 But he had another task to perform before he went to bed, which he
 would fain have kept unperformed were it possible to do so. He had
 written to a third friend to make an appointment for the evening,
 and this appointment he was bound to keep. He would very much rather
 have stayed at his club and played billiards with the navy captain,
 even though he might again have lost his shillings. The third friend
 was that Mrs. Morton to whom Lord Altringham had once alluded.
 "I supposed that it was coming," said Mrs. Morton, when she had
 listened, without letting a word fall from her own lips, to the long
 rambling story which Cousin George told her,--a rambling story in
 which there were many lies, but in which there was the essential
 truth, that Cousin George intended, if other things could be made to
 fit, to marry his cousin Emily Hotspur. Mrs. Morton was a woman who
 had been handsome,--dark, thin, with great brown eyes and thin lips
 and a long well-formed nose; she was in truth three years younger
 than George Hotspur, but she looked to be older. She was a clever
 woman and well read too, and in every respect superior to the man
 whom she had condescended to love. She earned her bread by her
 profession as an actress, and had done so since her earliest years.
 What story there may be of a Mr. Morton who had years ago married,
 and ill-used, and deserted her, need not here be told. Her strongest
 passion at this moment was love for the cold-blooded reprobate who
 had now come to tell her of his intended marriage. She had indeed
 loved George Hotspur, and George had been sufficiently attached to
 her to condescend to take aid from her earnings.
 
 "I supposed that it was coming," she said in a low voice when he
 brought to an end the rambling story which she had allowed him to
 tell without a word of interruption.
 
 "What is a fellow to do?" said George.
 
 "Is she handsome?"
 
 George thought that he might mitigate the pain by making little of
 his cousin. "Well, no, not particularly. She looks like a lady."
 
 "And I suppose I don't." For a moment there was a virulence in this
 which made poor George almost gasp. This woman was patient to a
 marvel, long-bearing, affectionate, imbued with that conviction
 so common to woman and the cause of so much delight to men,--that
 ill-usage and suffering are intended for woman; but George knew that
 she could turn upon him if goaded far enough, and rend him.