”

Sir Harry smiled his sweetest, and answered with

some good-humoured remark, but he said in his heart

that “birds of a feather flock together," and that his

cousin was-not a man of honour..

There are some things that no rogue can do. He

can understand what it is to condemn roguery, to

avoid it, to dislike it, to disbelieve in it;—but he can-

not understand what it is to hate it. Cousin George

had probably exaggerated the transaction of which


71

he had spoken, but he had little thought that in doing

so he had helped to imbue Sir Harry with a true idea

of his own character.

George passed on, and saw his cousin, who was

now standing up with a foreign ambassador. He just

spoke to her as he passed her, calling her by her 1?

Christian name as he did so. She gave him her hand

ever so graciously; and he, when he had gone on, re-

turned and asked her to name a dance.

“But I don't think I've one left that I mean to

dance,” she said.

“Then give me one that you don't mean to dance,"

he answered. And of course she gave it to him.

It was an hour afterwards that he came to claim

her promise, and she put her arm through his and

stood up with him. There was no talk then of her

not dancing, and she went whirling round the room

with him in great bliss. Cousin George waltzed well.

All such men do. It is a part of their-stock-in-trade.

On this evening Emily Hotspur thought that he waltzed

better than any one else, and told him so. “Another

turn? Of course I will with you, because you know

what you're about.”

“I'd blush if I'd time,” said he.

“A great many gentlemen ought to blush, I know.

That prince, whose name I always forget, and you,

are the only men in the room who dance well, accord-

ing to my ideas."


72

Then off they went again, and Emily was very

happy. He could at least dance well, and there could

be no reason why she should not enjoy his dancing

well since he had been considered to be white enough

to be asked to the ball.

But with George there was present at every turn

and twist of the dance an idea that he was there for

other work than that. He was tracking a head of

game after which there would be many hunters. He

had his advantages, and so would they have theirs.

One of his was this,—that he had her there with him

now, and he must use it. She would not fall into his

mouth merely by being whirled round the room

pleasantly. At last she was still, and consented to

take a walk with him out of the room, somewhere out

amidst the crowd, on the staircase if possible, so as to

get a breath of fresh air. Of course he soon had her

jammed into a corner out of which there was no im-

mediate mode of escape.

“We shall never get away again,” she said, laugh-

ing. Had she wanted to get away her tone and manner

would have been very different.

“I wonder whether you feel yourself to be the same

sort of person here that you are at Humblethwaite,”

he said.

“Exactly the same.”

“To me you seem to be so different.”

“In what way?”


“I don't think you are half so nice."

“How very unkind!”

Of course she was flattered. Of all flattery praise

is the coarsest and least efficacious. When you would

flatter a man, talk to him about himself, and criticise

him, pulling him to pieces by comparison of some

small present fault with his past conduct;-—and the:

rule holds the same with a woman. To tell her that:

she looks well is feeble work; but complain to her:

wofully that there is something wanting at the present:

moment, something lacking from the usual high

standard, some temporary loss of beauty, and your

solicitude will prevail with her.

"And in what am I not nice? I am sure I'm trying

to be as nice as I know how."

“Down at Humblethwaite you are simply yourself,

-Emily Hotspur."

. “And what am I here?”

“That formidable thing, -a success. Don't you

feel yourself that you are liſted a little off your legs?"

“Not a bit;—not an inch. Why should I?”

“I fail to make you understand quite what I mean.

Don't you feel that with all these princes and poten-

tates you are forced to be something else than your

natural self? Don't you know that you have to put

on a special manner, and to talk in a special way?

Does not the champagne fly to your head, more or

less?"


74

“Of course, the princes and potentates are not the

same as old Mrs. Crutchley, if you mean that.”

“I am not blaming you, you know, only I cannot

help being very anxious; and I found you so perfect

at Humblethwaite that. I cannot say that I like any

change. You know I am to come to Humblethwaite

again?”

“Of course you are."

“You go down next month, I believe?”

“Papa talks of going to Scarrowby for a few weeks.

He always does every year, and it is so dull. Did you

ever see Scarrowby?”

“Never.”

“You ought to come there some day. You know

one branch of the Hotspurs did live there for ever so

long."

“Is it a good house?”

“Very bad indeed; but there are enormous woods,

and the country is very wild, and everything is at

sixes and sevens. However, of course you would not

come, because it is in the middle of your London

season. There would be ever so many things to keep

you. You are a man who, I suppose, never was out

of London in June in your life, unless some race

meeting was going on.”

“Do you really take me for such as that, Emily?”

“Yes, I do. That is what they tell me you are.

Is it not true? Don't you go to races?”


75

“I should be quite willing to undertake never to

put my foot on a racecourse again this minute. I will

do so now if you will only ask it of me.”

She paused a moment, half thinking that she would

ask it, but at last she determined against it.

“No," she said; "if you think it proper to stay

away, you can do so without my asking it. I have

no right to make such a request. If you think races

are bad, why don't you stay away of your own ac-

cord?”

“They are bad,” he said.

“Then why do you go to them?”

“They are bad, and I do go to them. They are

very bad, and I go to them very often. But I will

stay away and never put my foot on another race-

course if you, my cousin, will ask me.”

“That is nonsense.”

“Try me. It shall not be nonsense. If you care

enough about me to wish to save me from what is

evil, you can do it. I care enough about you to give

up the pursuit at your bidding."

As he said this he looked down into her eyes, and

she knew that the full weight of his gaze was upon

her. She knew that his words and his looks together

were intended to impress her with some feeling of his

love for her. She knew at the moment, too, that they

gratified her. And she remembered also in the same

moment that her Cousin George was a black sheep.


36

"If you cannot refrain from what is bad without

my asking you,” she said, “your refraining will do no

good.”

He was making her some answer, when she insisted

on being taken away. “I must get into the dancing-

room; I must indeed, George. I have already thrown

over some poor wretch. No, not yet, I see, however.

I was not engaged for the quadrille; but I must go

back and look after the people.”

He led her back through the crowd; and as he did

so he perceived that Sir Harry's eyes were fixed upon

him. He did not much care for that. If he could

carry his Cousin Emily, he thought that he might carry

the Baronet also.

He could not get any special word with her again

that night. He asked her for another dance, but she

would not grant it to him. “You forget the princes

and potentates to whom I have to attend,” she said

to him, quoting his own words.

He did not blame her, even to himself, judging by

the importance which he attached to every word of

private conversation which he could have with her,

that she found it to be equally important. It was

something gained that she should know that he was

thinking of her. He could not be to her now like any

cousin, or any other man, with whom she might dance

three or four times without meaning anything. As he


77

was aware of it, so must she be; and he was glad that

she should feel that it was so.

“Emily tells me that you are going to Scarrowby

next month," he said afterwards to Sir Harry.

Sir Harry frowned, and answered him very shortly,

“Yes, we shall go there in June.”

“Is it a large place?”.

“Large? How do you mean? It is a good prop-

erty.”

“But the house?”

“The house is quite large enough for us,” said Sir

Harry; "but we do not have company there.”

This was said in a very cold tone, and there was

nothing more to be added. George, to do him justice,

had not been fishing for an invitation to Scarrowby.

He had simply been making conversation with the

Baronet. It would not have suited him to go to Scar-

rowby, because by doing so he would have lost the

power of renewing his visit to Humblethwaite. But

Sir Harry in this interview had been so very ungracious,

—and as George knew very well, because of the scene

in the corner,--that there might be a doubt whether

he would ever get to Humblethwaite at all. If he

failed, however, it should not be for the want of

audacity on his own part.

But, in truth, Sir Harry's blackness was still the

result of vacillation. Though he would fain redeem

this prodigal, if it were possible, and give him every-


78

thing that was to be given; yet, when he saw the

prodigal attempting to help himself to the good things,

his wrath was aroused. George Hotspur, as he betook

himself from Bruton Street to such other amusements

as were at his command, meditated much over his

position. He thought he could give up the racecourses;

but he was sure that he could at any rate say that he

would give them up.


CHAPTER VII.

Lady Altringham.

THERE was one more meeting between Cousin

George and Emily Hotspur, before Sir Harry left Lon-

don with his wife and daughter. On the Sunday after-

noon following the ball he called in Bruton Street, and

found Lord Alfred there. He knew that Lord Alfred

had been refused, and felt it to be a matter of course

that the suit would be pressed again. Nevertheless, he

was quite free from animosity to Lord Alfred. He

could see at a glance that there was no danger for

him on that side. Lord Alfred was talking to Lady

Elizabeth when he entered, and Emily was engaged

with a bald-headed old gentleman with a little ribbon

and a star. The bald-headed old gentleman soon

departed, and then Cousin George, in some skilfully

indirect way, took an opportunity of letting Emily know

that he should not go to Goodwood this July.

“Not go to Goodwood?” said she, pretending to

laugh. “It will be most unnatural, will it not?

They'll hardly start the horses without you, I should

think.”

“They'll have to start them without me, at any

rate.” Of course she understood what he meant, and


80

understood also why he had told her. But if his

promise were true, so much good had been done,—and

she sincerely believed that it was true. In what way

could he make love to her better than by refraining

from his evil ways for the sake of pleasing her? Other

bald-headed old gentlemen and bewigged old ladies

came in, and he had not time for another word. He

bade her adieu, saying nothing now of his hope of

meeting her in the autumn, and was very affectionate

in his farewell to Lady Elizabeth. “I don't suppose

I shall see Sir Harry before he starts. Say 'good-bye'

for me.”

"I will, George.”

“I am so sorry you are going. It has been so

jolly, coming in here of a Sunday, Lady Elizabeth,

and you have been so good to me. I wish Scarrowby

was at the bottom of the sea.”

“Sir Harry wouldn't like that at all.”

“I dare say not. And as such places must be, I

suppose they ought to be looked after. Only why in

June? Good-bye! We shall meet again some day,”

But not a word was said about Humblethwaite in Sep-

tember. He did not choose to mention the prospect

of his autumn visit, and she did not dare to do so.

Şir Harry had not renewed the offer, and she would

not venture to do so in Sir Harry's absence.

June passed away, -as Junes do pass in London,--

very gaily in appearance, very quickly in reality, with


:

81

a huge outlay of money and an enormous amount of

disappointment. Young ladies would not accept, and

young men would not propose. Papas became cross

and stingy, and mammas insinuated that daughters

were misbehaving. The daughters fought their own

battles, and became tired in the fighting of them, and

many a one had declared to herself before July had

come to an end that it was all vanity and vexation of

spirit.

The Altringhams always went to Goodwood,--hus-

band and wife. Goodwood and Ascot for Lady

Altringham were festivals quite as sacred as were Epsom

and Newmarket for the Earl. She looked forward to

them all the year, learned all she could about the

horses which were to run, was very anxious and ener-

getic about her party, and, if all that was said was

true, had her little book. It was an institution also

that George Hotspur should be one of the party; and

of all the arrangements usually made, it was not the

one which her Ladyship could dispense with the easiest.

George knew exactly what she liked to have done, and

how. The Earl himself would take no trouble, and

desired simply to be taken there and back and to find

everything that was wanted the very moment it was

needed. And in all such matters the Countess chose

that the Earl should be indulged. But it was necessary

to have some one who would look after something-

who would direct the servants, and give the orders

Sir Harry Potspur.


82

and be responsible. George Hotspur did it all ad-

mirably, and on such occasions earned the hospitality

which was given to him throughout the year. At Good-

wood he was almost indispensable to Lady Altringham;

but for this meeting she was willing to dispense with

him. “I tell you, Captain Hotspur, that you're not to

'go,” she said to him.

“Nonsense, Lady Altringham.”

“What a child you are! Don't you know what

depends on it?"

“It does not depend on that.”

“It may. Every little helps. Didn't you promise

her that you wouldn't?”.

“She didn't take it in earnest.”

“I tell you, you know nothing about a woman.

She will take it very much in earnest if you break your

word.”

“She'll never know.”

“She will. She'll learn it. A girl that learns every-

thing. Don't go; and let her know that you have not

gone."

· George Hotspur thought that he might go, and yet

let her know that he had not gone. An accomplished

and successful lie was to him a thing beautiful in itself,

an event that had come off usefully, a piece of

strategy that was evidence of skill, so much gained on

the world at the least possible outlay, an investment

from which had come profit without capital. Lady


83

Altringham was very hard on him, threatening him at

one time with the Earl's displeasure, and absolute

refusal of his company. But he pleaded hard that his

book would be ruinous to him if he did not go; that

this was a pursuit of such a kind that a man could not

give it up all of a moment; that he would take care

that his name was omitted from the printed list of

Lord Altringham's party; and that he ought to be

allowed this last recreation. The Countess at last gave

way, and George Hotspur did go to Goodwood.

With the success or failure of his book on that

occasion our story is not concerned. He was still

more flush of cash than usual, having something left

of his cousin's generous present. At any rate, he

came to no signal ruin at the races, and left London

for Castle Corry on the Ioth of August without any

known diminution to his prospects. At that time the

Hotspurs were at Humblethwaite with a party; but

it had been already decided that George should not

prepare to make his visit till September. He was to

write from Castle Corry. All that had been arranged

between him and the Countess, and from Castle Corry

he did write:-

“DEAR LADY ELIZABETH, --Sir Harry was kind

enough to say last winter that I might come to Hum-

blethwaite again this autumn. Will you be able to take

me in on the 2nd September? we have about finished

. 6*


84

with Altringham's house, and Lady A. has had enough

of me. They remain here till the end of this month.

With kind regards to Sir Harry and Emily;

“Believe me, yours always,

“GEORGE HOTSPUR."

Nothing could be simpler than this note, and yet

every word of it had been weighed and dictated by

Lady Altringham. “That won't do at all. You mustn't

seem to be so eager," she had said, when he showed

her the letter as prepared by himself. “Just write as

you would do if you were coming here.” Then she

sat down, and made the copy for him.

There was very great doubt and there was much

deliberation over that note at Humblethwaite. The

invitation had doubtless been given, and Sir Harry did

not wish to turn against his own flesh and blood,—to

deny admittance to his house to the man who was

the heir to his title. Were he to do so, he must give

some reason; he must declare some quarrel; he must

say boldly that all intercourse between them was to

be at an end; and he must inform Cousin George

that this strong step was taken because Cousin George

was a-blackguard! There was no other way of escape

left. And then Cousin George had done nothing since

the days of the London intimacies to warrant such

treatment; he had at least done nothing to warrant

such treatment at the hands of Sir Harry. And yet


85

Sir Harry thoroughly wished that his cousin was at

Jerusalem. He still vacillated, but his vacillation did

not bring him nearer to his cousin's side of the case.

Every little thing that he saw and heard made him

know that his cousin was a man to whom he could

not give his daughter even for the sake of the family,

without abandoning his duty to his child. At this i

moment, while he was considering George's letter, it

was quite clear to him that George should not be his

son-in-law; and yet the fact that the property and the

title might be brought together was not absent from

his mind when he gave his final assent. “I don't sup-

pose she cares for him,” he said to his wife.

“She's not in love with him, if you mean that.”

“What else should I mean?” he said, crossly.

“She may learn to be in love with him.”

“She had better not. She must be told. He may

come for a week. I won't have him here for longer.

Write to him and say that we shall be happy to have

him from the second to the ninth. Emily must be

told that I disapprove of him, but that I can't avoid

opening my house to him.”

These were the most severe words he had ever

spoken about Cousin George, but then the occasion

had become very critical. Lady Elizabeth's reply was

as follows:-

“MY DEAR COUSIN GEORGE,—Sir Harry and I will


86

be very happy to have you on the second, as you pro-

pose, and hope you will stay till the eleventh.

“Yours sincerely,

“ELIZABETH HOTSPUR.”

He was to come on a Saturday, but she did not

like to tell him to go on a Saturday, because of the

following day. Where could the poor fellow be on

the Sunday? She therefore stretched her invitation

for two days beyond the period sanctioned by Sir

Harry.

“It's not very gracious,” said George, as he showed

the note to Lady Altringham.

“I don't like it the less on that account. It shows

that they're afraid about her, and they wouldn't be

afraid without cause.”

“There is not much of that, I fancy.”

“They oughtn't to have a chance against you,-

not if you play your game well. Even in ordinary

cases the fathers and mothers are beaten by the lovers

nine times out of ten. It is only when the men are

oafs and louts that they are driven off. But with you,

with your cousinship, and half-heirship, and all your

practice, and the family likeness, and the rest of it, if

you only take a little trouble”.

“I'll take any amount of trouble.”

“No, you won't. You'll deny yourself nothing,

and go through no ordeal that is disagreeable to you.


I don't suppose your things are a bit better arranged

in London than they were in the spring.” She looked

at him as though waiting for an answer, but he was

silent. “It's too late for anything of that kind now,

but still you may do very much. Make up your mind'

to this, that you'll ask Miss Hotspur to be your wife

before you leave—what's the name of the place?”

“I have quite made up my mind to that, Lady

Altringham.”

“As to the manner of doing it, I don't suppose that

I can teach you anything."

“I don't know about that.”

“At any rate I shan't try. Only remember this.

Get her to promise to be firm, and then go at once

to Sir Harry. Don't let there be an appearance of

doubt in speaking to him. And if he tells you of the

property,--angrily I mean,—then do you tell him of

the title. Make him understand that you give as

much as you get. I don't suppose he will yield at

first. Why should he? You are not the very best

young man about town, you know. But if you get

her, he must follow. She looks like one that would

stick to it, if she once had said it.”

Thus prompted George Hotspur went from Castle

Corry to Humblethwaite. I wonder whether he was

aware of the extent of the friendship of his friend,

and whether he ever considered why it was that such

a woman should be so anxious to assist him in making


88

his fortune, let it be at what cost it might to others!

Lady Altringham was not the least in love with Captain

Hotspur, was bound to him by no tie whatsoever,

would suffer no loss in the world should Cousin George

come to utter and incurable ruin; but she was a woman

of energy, and, as she liked the man, she was zealous

in his friendship.


CHAPTER VIII.

Airey Force.

LADY ELIZABETH had been instructed by Sir Harry

to warn her daughter not to fall in love with Cousin

George during his visit to Humblethwaite; and Lady

Elizabeth was, as a wife, accustomed to obey her

husband in all things. But obedience in this matter

was very difficult. Such a caution as that received is

not easily given even between a mother and a child,

and is especially difficult when the mother is uncon-

sciously aware of her child's superiority to herself.

Emily was in all respects the bigger woman of the two,

and was sure to get the best of it in any such caution-

ing. It is so hard to have to bid a girl, and a good

girl too, not to fall in love with a particular man!

There is left among us at any rate so much of reserve

and assumed delicacy as to require us to consider, or

pretend to consider on the girl's behalf, that of course

she won't fall in love. We know that she will, sooner

or later; and probably as much sooner as opportunityl

may offer. That is our experience of the genus girl

in the general; and we quite approve of her for her

readiness to do so. It is, indeed, her nature; and the

propensity has been planted in her for wise purposes.


90

But as to this or that special sample of the genus girl,

in reference to this or that special sample of the genus

young man, we always feel ourselves bound to take it

as a matter of course that there can be nothing of the

kind, till the thing is done. Any caution on the

matter is therefore difficult and disagreeable, as con-

veying almost an insult. Mothers in well-regulated

families do not caution their daughters in reference to

special young men. But Lady Elizabeth had been de-:

sired by her husband to give the caution, and must in

some sort obey the instruction. Two days before

George's arrival she endeavoured to do as she was told;

not with the most signal success.

“Your Cousin George is coming on Saturday.”

“So I heard Papa say.”

“Your Papa gave him a sort of invitation when he

was here last time, and so he has proposed himself.”

“Why should not he? It seems very natural. He

is the nearest relation we have got, and we all like

him.”

“I don't think your Papa does like him.”

“I do.”

“What I mean is your Papa doesn't approve of

him. He goes to races, and bets, and all that kind of

thing. And then your Papa thinks that he's over head

and ears in debt.”

“I don't know anything about his debts.” As for

his going to races, I believe he has given them up.


91

I am sure he would if he were asked.” Then there

was a pause, for Lady Elizabeth hardly knew how to

pronounce her caution. “Why shouldn't Papa pay his

debts?”

“My dear!”

“Well, Mamma, why shouldn't he? And why

shouldn't Papa let him have the property; I mean,

leave it to him instead of to me?”

“If your brother had lived— ”

“He didn't live, Mamma. That has been our

great misfortune. But so it is; and why shouldn't

George be allowed to take his place? I'm sure it

would be for the best. Papa thinks so much about

the name, and the family, and all that.”

“My dear, you must leave him to do as he thinks

fit in all such matters. You may be sure that he will

do what he believes to be his duty. What I was going

to say was this—-" And, instead of saying it, Lady

Elizabeth still hesitated.

“I know what you want to say, Mamma, just as

well as though the words were out of your mouth.

You want to make me to understand that George is a

black sheep."

“I'm afraid he is.”.

“But black sheep are not like blackamoors; they

may be washed white. You said so yourself the other

day.”

“Did I, my dear?”


92

“Certainly you did; and certainly they may. Why,

Mamma, what is all religion but the washing of black

sheep white; making the black a little less black, scrap-

ing a spot white here and there?”

; “I am afraid your Cousin George is beyond wash-

ing.”

“Then Mamma, all I can say is, he oughtn't to

come here. Mind, I think you wrong him. I dare-

say he has been giddy and fond of pleasure; but if he

is so bad as you say, Papa should tell him at once not

to come. As far as I am concerned, I don't believe

he is so bad; and I shall be glad to see him.”

There was no cautioning a young woman who

could reason in this way, and who could look at her

mother as Emily looked. It was not, at least, within

the power of Lady Elizabeth to do so. And yet she

could not tell Sir Harry of her failure. She thought

that she had expressed the caution; and she thought

also that her daughter would be wise enough to be

guided ,--not by her mother's wisdom, but by the

words of her father. Poor dear woman! She was

thinking of it every hour of the day; but she said no-

thing more on the subject, either to her daughter or to

Sir Harry.

The black sheep came, and made one of a number

of numerous visitors. It had been felt that the danger

would be less among a multitude; and there was present

a very excellent young man, as to whom there were


93

hopes. Steps had not been taken about this excellent

young man as had been done in reference to Lord

Alfred; but still there were hopes. He was the eldest

son of a Lincolnshire squire, a man of fair property

and undoubted family; but who, it was thought, would

not object to merge the name of Thoresby in that of

Hotspur. Nothing came of the young man, who was

bashful, and to whom Miss Hotspur certainly gave no

entertainment of a nature to remove his bashfulness.

But when the day for George's coming had been fixed,

Sir Harry thought it expedient to write to young

Thoresby and accelerate a visit which had been previ-

ously proposed. Sir Harry as he did so almost hated

himself for his anxiety to dispose of his daughter. He

was a gentleman, every inch of him; and he thoroughly

desired to do his duty. He knew, however, that there

was much in his feelings of which he could not but be

ashamed. And yet, if something were not done to

assist his girl in a right disposal of all that she had to

bestow with her hand, how was it probable that it

could be disposed aright?

The black sheep came, and found young Thoresby

and some dozen other strangers in the house. He

smiled upon them all, and before the first evening

was over had made himself the popular man of the

house. Sir Harry, like a fool as he was, had given

his cousin only two fingers, and had looked black at

their first meeting. Nothing could be gained by con-


94

duct such as that with such a guest. Before the gen-

tlemen left the dinner-table on the first day even

he had smiled and joked and had asked questions

about “Altringham's mountains.” “The worst of

you fellows who go to Scotland is that you care

nothing for real sport when you come down south

afterwards." All this conversation about Lord Al-

tringham's grouse and the Scotch mountains helped

George Hotspur, so that when he went into the

drawing-room he was in the ascendant. Many men

have learned the value of such ascendancy, and most

men have known the want of it.

Poor Lady Elizabeth had not a chance with Cousin

George. She succumbed to him at once, not knowing

why, but feeling that she herself became bright,

amusing, and happy when talking to him. She was

a woman not given to familiarities; but she did

; become familiar with him, allowing him little liberties

of expression which no other man would take with

her, and putting them all down to the score of cousin-

hood. He might be a black sheep. She feared there

could be but little doubt that he was one. But, from

her worsted-work up to the demerits of her dearest

friend, he did know how to talk better than any other

young man she knew. To Emily, on that first evening,

he said very little. When he first met her he had

pressed her hand, and looked into her eyes, and

smiled on her with a smile so sweet that it was as


95

though a god had smiled on her. She had made up

her mind that he should be nothing to her,-nothing

beyond a dear cousin; nevertheless, her eye had

watched him during the whole hour of dinner, and,

not knowing that it was so, she had waited for his

coming to them in the evening. Heavens and earth!

what an oaf was that young Thoresby as the two stood

together near the door! She did not want her cousin

to come and talk to her, but she listened and laughed

within herself as she saw how pleased was her mother

by the attentions of the black sheep.

• One word Cousin George did say to Emily Hotspur

that night, just as the ladies were leaving the room.

It was said in a whisper, with a little laugh, with that

air of half joke half earnest which may be so effica-

cious in conversation: “I did not go to Goodwood,

after all.”

She raised her eyes to his for a quarter of a second,

thanking him for his goodness in refraining. “I don't

believe that he is really a black sheep at all,” she said

to herself that night, as she laid her head upon her

pillow.

After all, the devil fights under great disadvantages,

and has to carry weights in all his races which are

almost unfair. He lies as a matter of course, believ-

ing thoroughly in lies, thinking that it is by lies chiefly

that he must make his running good; and yet every

lie he tells, after it has been told and used, remains


96

as an additional weight to be carried. When you

have used your lie gracefully and successfully, it is

hard to bury it and get it well out of sight. It crops

up here and there against you, requiring more lies;

and at last, too often, has to be admitted as a lie,

most usually so admitted in silence, but still admitted,

-to be forgiven or not, according to the circum-

stances of the case. The most perfect forgiveness is

that which is extended to him who is known to lie in

everything. The man has to be taken, lies and all, as

a man is taken with a squint, or a harelip, or a bad

temper. He has an uphill game to fight, but when

once well known, he does not fall into the difficulty

of being believed.

George Hotspur's lie was believed. To our readers

it may appear to have been most gratuitous, unne-

cessary, and inexpedient. The girl would not have

quarrelled with him for going to the races,--would

never have asked anything about it. But George

knew that he must make his running. It would not

suffice that she should not quarrel with him. He had

to win her, and it came so natural to him to lie! And

the lie was efficacious; she was glad to know that he

stayed away from the races-for her sake. Had it

not been for her sake? She would not bid him stay

away, but she was so glad that he had stayed! The

lie was very useful;—if it only could have been buried

: and put out of sight when used!


97

There was partridge-shooting for four days; not

good shooting, but work which carried the men far

from home, and enabled Sir Harry to look after his

cousin. George, so looked after, did not dare to say

that on any day he would shirk the shooting. But Sir

Harry, as he watched his cousin, gradually lost his

keenness for watching him. Might it not be best that

he should let matters arrange themselves? This young

squire from Lincolnshire was evidently an oaf. Sir

Harry could not even cherish a hope on that side.

His girl was very good, and she had been told, and

the work of watching went so much against the grain

with him! And then, added to it all, was the remem-

brance that if the worst came to the worst, the title

and property would be kept together. George Hotspur *

might have fought his fight, we think, without the aid

of his lie.

On the Friday the party was to some extent broken

up. The oaf and sundry other persons went away.

Sir Harry had thought that the cousin would go on

the Saturday, and had been angry with his wife be-

cause his orders on that head had not been implicitly

obeyed. But when the Friday came, and George

offered to go in with him to Penrith, to hear some

case of fish-poaching which was to be brought before

the magistrates, he had forgiven the offence. George

had a great deal to say about fish, and then went on

to say a good deal about himself. If he could only

Sir Harry Hotspur.


98

get some employment, a farm, say, where he might

have hunting, how good it would be! For he did not

pretend to any virtuous abnegation of the pleasures of

the world, but was willing,—so he said, -to add to

them some little attempt to earn his own bread. On

this day Sir Harry liked his cousin better than he had

ever done before, though he did not even then place

the least confidence in his cousin's sincerity as to the

farm and the earning of bread.

On their return to the Hall on Friday they found

that a party had been made to go to Ulleswater on

the Saturday. A certain Mrs. Fitzpatrick was staying

in the house, who had never seen the lake, and the

carriage was to take them to Airey Force Airey

Force, as everybody knows, is a waterfall near to the

shores of the lake, and is the great lion of the Lake

scenery on that side of the mountains. The waterfall

was full fifteen miles from Humblethwaite, but the

distance had been done before, and could be done

again. Emily, Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and two other young

ladies were to go. Mr. Fitzpatrick would sit on the

box. There was a youth there also who had left

school and not yet gone to college. He was to be

allowed to drive a dog-cart. Of course George Hotspur

was ready to go in the dog-cart with him.

George had determined from the commencement of

his visit, when he began to foresee that this Saturday

would be more at his command than any other day,


99

that on this Saturday he would make or mar his for-

tune for life. He had perceived that his cousin was

cautious with him, that he would be allowed but little

scope for love-making, that she was in some sort

afraid of him; but he perceived also that in a quiet

undemonstrative way she was very gracious to him.

She never ignored him, as young ladies will some-

times ignore young men, but thought of him even in

his absence, and was solicitous for his comfort. He

was clever enough to read little signs, and was sure at

any rate that she liked him.

“Why did you not postpone the party till George

was gone?” Sir Harry said to his wife.

“The Fitzpatricks also go on Monday,” she an-

swered, “and we could not refuse them.”

Then again it occurred to Sir Harry that life would

not be worth having if he was to be afraid to allow

his daughter to go to a picnic in company with her

cousin.

There is a bridge across the water at the top of 7

Airey Force, which is perhaps one of the prettiest

spots in the whole of our Lake country. The entire

party on their arrival of course went up to the bridge,

and then the entire party of course descended. How

it happened that in the course of the afternoon

George and Emily were there again, and were there

unattended, who can tell? If she had meant to be

cautious, she must very much have changed her plans


100

in allowing herself to be led thither. And as he stood

there, with no eye resting on them, his arm was round

her waist and she was pressed to his side.

"Dearest, dearest," he said, “may I believe that

you love me?"

“I have said so. You may believe it if you

will.”

She did not attempt to make the distance greater

between them. She leant against him willingly.

“Dear George, I do love you. My choice has

been made. I have to trust to you for everything."

“You shall never trust in vain," he said.

“You must reform, you know,” she said, turning

round and looking up into his face with a smile.

“They say that you have been wild. You must not

be wild any more, sir.”

“I will reform. I have reformed. I say it boldly;

I have become an altered man since I knew you. I

have lived with one hope, and even the hope alone

has changed me. Now I have got all that I have

hoped for. Oh, Emily, I wish you knew how much I

love you!"

They were there on the bridge, or roaming together

alone among the woods, for nearly an hour after that,

till Mrs. Fitzpatrick, who knew the value of the prize

and the nature of the man, began to fear that she had

been remiss in her duty as chaperon. As Emily came

down and joined the party at last, she was perfectly


ΙΟΙ

regardless either of their frowns or smiles. There had

been one last compact made between the lovers.

“George,” she had said, “whatever it may cost us,

let there be no secrets.”

“Of course not,” he replied.

“I will tell Mamma to-night; and you must tell

Papa. You will promise me?”

“Certainly. It is what I should insist on doing

myself. I could not stay in his house under other

circumstances. But you too must promise me one

thing, Emily.”

“What is it?"

“You will be true to me, even though he should

refuse his consent?”

She paused before she answered him.

“I will be true to you. I cannot be otherwise than

true to you. My love was a thing to give, but when

given I cannot take it back. I will be true to you,

but of course we cannot be married unless Papa

consents."

He urged her no further. He was too wise to think

it possible that he could do so without injuring his

cause. Then they found the others, and Emily made

her apologies to Mrs. Fitzpatrick for the delay with a

quiet dignity that struck her Cousin George almost

with awe. How had it been that such a one as he

had won so great a creature?

George, as he was driven home by his young com-


102

panion, was full of joyous chatter and light small talk.

He had done a good stroke of business, and was

happy. If only the Baronet could be brought round,

all the troubles which had enveloped him since a beard

had first begun to grow on his chin would disappear

as a mist beneath the full rays of the sun; or even if

there still might be a trouble or two,—and as he thought

of his prospects he remembered that they could not all

be made to disappear in the mist fashion,—there would

be that which would gild the clouds. At any rate he

had done a good stroke of business. And he loved

the girl too. He thought that of all the girls he had

seen about town, or about the country either, she was

the bonniest and the brightest and the most clever. It

might well have been that a poor devil like he in search

of an heiress might have been forced to put up with

personal disadvantages,—with age, with plain looks,

with vulgar manners, with low birth; but here, so

excellent was his fortune, there was everything which

fortune could give! Love her? Of course he loved

her. He would do anything on earth for her. And

how jolly they would be together when they got hold

of their share of that £20,000 a year! And how jolly

it would be to owe nothing to anybody! As he thought

of this, however, there came upon him the reminiscence

of a certain Captain Stubber, and the further remi-

niscence of a certain Mr. Abraham Hart, with both

of whom he had dealings; and he told himself that it


103

would behove him to call up all his pluck when

discussing those gentlemen and their dealings, with

the Baronet. He was sure that the Baronet would not

like Captain Stubber nor Mr. Hart, and that a good

deal of pluck would be needed. But on the whole he

had done a great stroke of business; and, as a con-

sequence of his success, talked and chatted all the way

home, till the youth who was driving him thought that

George was about the nicest fellow that he had ever

met.

Emily Hotspur, as she took her place in the carriage,

was very silent. She also had much of which to think,

much on which-as she dreamed—to congratulate

herself. But she could not think of it and talk at the

same time. She had made her little apology with

graceful ease. She had just smiled,—but the smile

was almost a rebuke,—when one of her companions

had ventured on the beginning of some little joke as

to her company, and then she had led the way to the

carriage. Mrs. Fitzpatrick and the two girls were

nothing to her now, let them suspect what they chose

or say what they might. She had given herself away,

and she triumphed in the surrender. The spot on

which he had told her of his love should be sacred to

her for ever. It was a joy to her that it was near to

her own home, the home that she would give to him,

so that she might go there with him again and again.

She had very much to consider and to remember. A


104

black sheep! No! Of all the flock he should be the

least black. It might be that in the energy of his

pleasures he had exceeded other men, as he did exceed

all other men in everything that he did and said. Who

was so clever? who so bright? who so handsome, so

full of poetry and of manly grace? How sweet was his

voice, how fine his gait, how gracious his smile! And

then in his brow there was that look of command which

she had ever recognized in her father's face as belong-

ing to his yace as a Hotspur,-only added to it was a

godlike beauty which her father never could have

possessed.

