[295]
 
 It may have been to facilitate negotiations with the Bretons and
 Angevins that John had proceeded so far as Anvers, which lies in
 the south of Maine, close to the border of Anjou. We next find him
 overtaking Philip at the siege of Lavardin. Philip hereupon withdrew
 to Le Mans; but he had cut the ground from under his own feet; the
 garrison of Le Mans was under the orders of William des Roches, who
 had been appointed commandant there by Philip himself. John, too, was
 following close behind; and when he appeared before the city, Philip
 again beat a hasty retreat, while William des Roches brought Arthur
 and Constance in person to make their peace with John, and then opened
 the gates of Le Mans to the new allies. John, in anticipation of his
 triumph, had already summoned Almeric, the viscount of Thouars, who
 was acting as seneschal of Anjou and commandant of Chinon for Arthur,
 to come and submit to him at Le Mans. On the very day of John’s entry
 into the city, September 22, Almeric obeyed. Next day John proceeded
 to Chinon, where he installed Roger de Lacy as castellan in Almeric’s
 stead. With less than his usual caution, he let Arthur, Constance and
 their friends, including Almeric, stay behind at Le Mans. Some one had
 already suggested to Arthur a suspicion that his uncle intended to
 make him a prisoner; as soon, therefore, as John was out of the way at
 Chinon, the majority of the Bretons, with their young duke, his mother,
 and the viscount of Thouars, returned on September 24 to their old
 headquarters at Angers.[296] It was probably tidings of this which made
 John hasten back from Chinon to Le Mans, where he was again September
 27 to 30; after that nothing is known of his movements till October 6,
 when he was at Saumur.[297] His appearance there is suggestive, for
 Saumur was the key of the Angevin border towards Poitou on the south
 and Touraine on the east. With Le Mans, Chinon and Saumur all in his
 hands, he had only to secure a firm foothold in Aquitaine, and then he
 might attack Anjou from three sides at once. But to attack it without
 such a foothold, and with only the small force which he had brought
 with him from Normandy,[298] would have been worse than useless. On
 October 8, therefore, John was once more at Le Mans, and thence he fell
 back upon Normandy.[299]
 
 There was indeed another reason for his return. Cardinal Peter of
 Capua, who had at the beginning of the year negotiated a truce between
 Philip and Richard, was still at the French court. The truce had been
 made for three years; Richard’s death had of course put an abrupt end
 to it; but Peter was urgent that it should be renewed for its original
 term between Philip and John. Such a proposal implied that John was
 recognized at Rome as Richard’s lawful heir; it was therefore obviously
 politic for John to cherish such a valuable alliance by falling in
 with the cardinal’s endeavours after a pacification. Through Peter’s
 mediation a truce was made at the end of October. Its term was fixed
 for the ensuing S. Hilary’s Day;[300] but there was evidently a tacit
 understanding that it was to be the forerunner of a more lasting
 agreement.
 
 [Sidenote: 1200]
 
 This truce set John free for a visit to Aquitaine. On November 8 he
 was at Niort, and in the beginning of December at Poitiers; by the
 middle of December he had returned to Normandy.[301] Meanwhile a
 question which had been pending for several years, as to the legality
 of Philip’s repudiation of his queen Ingebiorg and his subsequent union
 with Agnes of Merania, had been, in a council at Dijon on December 6,
 decided by Cardinal Peter against the king, and Peter had laid the
 royal domain of France under an interdict which was to take effect
 from January 15, 1200,[302] the second day after the expiration of the
 truce. With this prospect before his eyes, Philip dared not insult
 John as he had insulted him at their last meeting. It was with a very
 different proposal that he met him at the old trysting-place between
 Gaillon and Les Andelys. A project which had been mooted just twelve
 months before, for a family alliance to cement peace between the houses
 of France and Anjou, was now revived; it was proposed that Philip’s
 son Louis should marry John’s niece Blanche of Castille, and that John
 should furnish the bride with a dowry in Norman lands and English
 money.[303] The two kings “rushed into each other’s arms,” and renewed
 their truce till midsummer.[304]
 
 While Eleanor went to Spain to fetch her granddaughter,[305] John
 seized his opportunity for a visit to England.[306] His first business
 there was to concert measures with the justiciar for raising the
 required sum of money. They decided that the taxes for the year should
 consist of a scutage of two marks on the knight’s fee and a payment
 of three shillings for “every working plough.”[307] John then went to
 York, where he had summoned the Scot king to meet him at the end of
 March. William, however, failed to appear.[308] During John’s stay
 at York a claim of exemption from the plough tax was laid before him
 by the heads of some of the great Cistercian houses in Yorkshire in
 behalf of their whole order; this led to a violent quarrel between
 them and the king, which was still unsettled when he returned to
 Normandy at the end of April.[309] Thither Blanche was brought to meet
 him, and on Ascension Day (May 18)[310] he and Philip, at a personal
 meeting on the border, made a definite treaty of peace. By that treaty
 Philip in so many words acknowledged John as “his brother Richard’s
 right heir,” and granted him, as such, the investiture of the whole
 Angevin dominions, with the exception of certain territories which
 John ceded to the crown of France. These were the Vexin, Auvergne, the
 greater part of the county of Evreux, and the lordships of Issoudun,
 Graçay, and Bourges. To the cession of the Vexin and of the chief
 border castles of the county of Evreux, as well as to the resignation
 of the Angevin claim upon Auvergne, Richard had been pledged by his
 treaty with Philip in 1195; Issoudun and Graçay had been restored to
 the English king by the same treaty, having been ceded by Richard to
 France in 1189.[311] Twenty thousand marks and the formal cession of
 all these territories--most, if not all, of which were already in
 Philip’s hands--was not too heavy a price to pay for the personal
 triumph and the political gain involved in Philip’s recognition of John
 as the lawful heir to Normandy, Maine, Anjou, Touraine and Aquitaine,
 and also to the overlordship of Britanny; for not only was this last
 right distinctly conceded to him by Philip, but Arthur was then and
 there made to do homage to his uncle for his duchy[312] as soon as John
 himself had done homage to Philip for the whole continental heritage of
 the house of Anjou.[313] The marriage of Louis and Blanche took place
 four days later.[314]
 
 John now set out upon a sort of triumphal progress southward, to take
 seisin of all his dominions. On June 18 he reached Angers, where he
 stayed four days and took a hundred and fifty hostages as security for
 the loyalty of the citizens.[315] At the end of June he was at Tours,
 and early in July at Poitiers, whence he proceeded into Gascony; on the
 14th he was welcomed at Bordeaux by the archbishop and the barons of
 the land.[316] He immediately secured the help of the Gascon primate in
 a scheme which he had been cherishing for some months past for getting
 rid of the wife to whom he had been married for eleven years, Isabel
 of Gloucester. The papal legate who in 1189 had revoked the sentence
 passed by Archbishop Baldwin upon John and Isabel had done so on the
 ground that, since John had appealed to Rome, his marriage must be
 recognized as lawful, pending the result of the appeal. A decision
 of the Pope on that appeal would of course have either annulled the
 marriage or made it indissoluble; but it seems that no such decision
 had ever been given, because the appeal had never been prosecuted. The
 marriage was therefore still voidable. At the close of 1199 John called
 upon the Norman bishops to declare it void, and they obeyed him.[317]
 He now, it seems, laid the case before the archbishop of Bordeaux and
 the bishop of Poitiers and Saintes; and their decision was in accord
 with that of their Norman brethren.[318] On the bare question--which
 was doubtless all that John put before them--whether a marriage between
 cousins in the fourth degree was lawful without a dispensation, indeed,
 no other decision was possible according to the letter of the canon
 law. The Pope, however, when the matter came to his knowledge, seems
 to have felt that in this particular case adhesion to the letter of
 the law involved a violation of its spirit, and to have been extremely
 angry with John’s episcopal tools as well as with John himself.[319]
 He had, however, no ground for interfering in the matter except on an
 appeal from Isabel; and Isabel did not appeal.[320] There is every
 reason to think--and certainly no reason to wonder--that the removal of
 the matrimonial yoke was as welcome to her as to John, and that their
 divorce was in fact, like that of Louis VII. and Eleanor, a separation
 by mutual consent.
 
 John had already chosen another heiress to take Isabel’s place. One
 of the most important, and also most troublesome, feudataries of the
 duchy of Aquitaine was Ademar, count of Angoulême. It was in a quarrel
 with him and his half-brother, the viscount of Limoges, that Richard
 Cœur-de-Lion had met his death, which Richard’s son had avenged by
 slaying the viscount.[321] The feud between the houses of Angoulême and
 Limoges thus threatened to be a considerable hindrance to Richard’s
 successor in his efforts to secure a hold upon his southern duchy.
 How formidable Ademar and his nephew, the new viscount of Limoges,
 had already made themselves is shown by the insertion in the treaty
 between John and Philip of a special provision that John should
 “receive their homage and grant them their rights.”[322] It is said
 to have been Philip who counselled John to secure the fidelity of
 Ademar of Angoulême in another way, by taking to wife Ademar’s only
 child.[323] Philip’s motives for giving the advice, and John’s motives
 for following it, are alike obscure. Nineteen years before, Richard, as
 duke of Aquitaine, had vainly striven to wrest Angoulême from Ademar
 in behalf of Matilda, the only child of Ademar’s late brother, Count
 Vulgrin III. Matilda was now the wife of Hugh “the Brown” of Lusignan,
 who in 1179 or 1180 had, in spite of King Henry, made himself master
 of the county of La Marche, and whose personal importance in southern
 Gaul was increased by the rank and fame which his brothers Geoffrey,
 Guy and Almeric had won in the kingdoms of Jerusalem and Cyprus.
 The dispute between Matilda and her uncle had been settled by the
 betrothal of her son--another Hugh the Brown--to Ademar’s daughter and
 heiress, Isabel.[324] A marriage between John and this little Isabel of
 Angoulême, therefore, would be certain to provoke the bitter resentment
 of the whole Lusignan family. On the other hand, it would provoke their
 resentment against Isabel’s father as well as against her husband,
 and thus destroy the chance of a coalition of Angoulême and La Marche
 against their common overlord. It is not impossible that for John, who
 gambled in politics as habitually as he did at the game of “tables,”
 the very wantonness of the scheme and the hazards attendant upon it may
 have only added to its attractions. But his subsequent conduct towards
 the Lusignans suggests the idea that he may have had a deeper motive,
 a deliberate purpose of goading them into some outrageous course of
 action which might enable him to recover La Marche and ruin them
 completely, or even drive them altogether out of the land.
 
 On his way to Poitou John issued from Chinon, on June 25, a summons to
 Ademar of Angoulême and Guy of Limoges to come and perform their homage
 on July 5 at Lusignan,[325] the ancestral home of Hugh the Brown. There
 Hugh and Matilda were bringing up their intended daughter-in-law in
 company with her boy bridegroom, and there John was no doubt, at the
 moment, sure of a welcome, for Hugh and his brother Ralf had become his
 liegemen at Caen on January 28.[326] Thus, in all likelihood, it was
 under Hugh’s very roof, and as sharers in his hospitality, that the
 king of England and the count of Angoulême laid their plot for robbing
 Hugh’s son of his plighted bride and his promised heritage. John
 indeed, as soon as his divorce was ratified by the southern bishops,
 despatched, or gave out that he had despatched, an embassy to Portugal
 with instructions to ask for the hand of a daughter of the Portuguese
 king;[327] but their mission was a mere blind to divert suspicion
 till Ademar should have succeeded in getting his child back into his
 own hands. The poor little betrothed--she was only about twelve years
 old[328]--was literally stolen by her father,[329] and carried off
 by him to his capital city. There her royal suitor met them, and on
 August 24 the marriage ceremony was performed by the archbishop of
 Bordeaux.[330] The newly married couple immediately afterwards set out
 for the north; at the beginning of October they went to England, and on
 the 8th they were crowned together at Westminster.[331]
 
 [Sidenote: 1200–1201]
 
 Six weeks later the king of Scots made his submission. Summoned to meet
 his overlord at Lincoln on November 21, William the Lion this time
 did not venture to disobey the summons; both kings reached Lincoln on
 the appointed day. Next morning John, in defiance of an old tradition
 which forbade a king to appear in regal state within the walls of
 Lincoln, went to the minster and offered a golden chalice at the altar
 of S. John the Baptist. Thence he proceeded to his colloquy with
 William “on the top of the steep hill” outside the city. There, amid
 a group of prelates and barons, and “in the sight of all the people,”
 William performed his homage, and swore on Archbishop Hubert’s cross
 that he would be faithful to John against all men, “saving his own
 right.” Then, and not till then, did he venture again to demand, “as
 his right and heritage,” the disputed counties. A long discussion
 ended in an adjournment of the question till the next Whitsuntide;
 which of course meant that it was to be put off indefinitely. On
 the morrow (November 23) the king of Scots set out on his homeward
 journey, while the king of England helped with his own hands to carry
 to its last resting-place in Lincoln minster the body of the only man
 among his father’s old friends for whom he seems to have felt a real
 liking, though he turned a deaf ear to his counsels--S. Hugh, who had
 died in London a week before.[332] Soon after Christmas John was at
 Lincoln again, quarrelling with the canons about the election of Hugh’s
 successor.[333] He and his young queen afterwards made a progress
 through the north, almost up to the Scottish border,[334] and back
 through Cumberland to York, which they reached at Mid-Lent (March 1,
 1201). At Easter (March 25) they “wore their crowns” at Canterbury.[335]
 
 [Sidenote: 1201]
 
 Meanwhile, open hostilities had begun between John and the Lusignans;
 and so far as can be made out from the scanty evidence available, it
 seems to have been John who began them. A French historian of the time
 asserts that the castle of Driencourt in Normandy, which belonged
 to Ralf of Lusignan as count of Eu in right of his wife, was seized
 by John’s orders while Ralf was in John’s service in England.[336]
 It is certain that John, on March 6, 1201, issued letters patent to
 Hugh of Bailleul and Thomas of St. Valery authorizing them to attack
 Ralf’s territories at the close of Easter and “do him all the harm they
 could,” and promising that they should never be compelled to make good
 any damage which they might inflict upon him; while on the same day
 one William “de Kaev” was despatched on a mission to the inhabitants
 of Driencourt and of the whole county of Eu to make arrangements for
 mutual security between them and the king, without reference to their
 count.[337] Two days later John summoned all his faithful barons,
 knights, clerks, burghers, and other tenants of the county of La Marche
 “to come to his service, and do to him what they had been wont to
 do to his predecessors.”[338] In other words, he claimed the direct
 ownership of the county, to which his father had indeed been entitled
 by purchase from the late Count Adelbert and by the homage of its
 tenants, but of which Henry had never been able and Richard had never
 even tried to take possession, and which Hugh of Lusignan had now held
 for more than twenty years. If their oath of liege homage to John had
 hitherto restrained Hugh and Ralf from giving vent to their anger at
 John’s marriage, it restrained them no longer now. They at once laid a
 complaint against John, for unjust aggression and spoliation, before
 the king of France as lord paramount of Aquitaine.[339] Ralf formally
 renounced his allegiance to John,[340] and Hugh, with all the forces
 that he could muster, invaded Poitou, where, as usual, he found plenty
 of allies ready to join him.[341] The most important of the Poitevin
 barons, indeed, Almeric of Thouars, was won over to John’s side by
 the diplomacy of Eleanor; but the danger appeared so great that both
 Eleanor and Almeric besought John to come over and deal with it in
 person as soon as he possibly could; and at the end of April the count
 of Angoulême and John’s other friends in the south proposed sending
 Almeric to confer with John in England.[342]
 
 John meanwhile was summoning the earls and barons of England to meet
 him at Portsmouth at Whitsuntide (May 13), ready with horses and arms
 to accompany him over sea. The earls held a meeting at Leicester,
 and thence unanimously sent him word that they would not go with him
 “unless he gave them back their rights. For the king, following ill
 counsel, was demanding their castles of them; and beginning with
 William of Aubigny, he demanded of him the castle of Belvoir. William
 satisfied him by giving him his son as a hostage, and thus kept his
 castle.”[343] Notwithstanding their protest, the barons brought their
 forces to Portsmouth on the appointed day, equipped for a campaign, and
 each man provided with the money needful to cover his expenses during
 the usual term of service in a feudal host. This, and nothing more, was
 precisely what John wanted them to do: “He took from some of them the
 money which they would have spent in his service, and let them return
 home.”[344] The ready money which he thus obtained was a more useful
 and safer weapon for his purpose than the host itself would have been,
 and no pretext was left for the discussion of inconvenient questions.
 The king immediately despatched William the Marshal and Roger de Lacy,
 each at the head of a hundred mercenaries, “to check the assaults of
 his enemies on the borders of Normandy.” At the same time he appointed
 his chamberlain, Hubert de Burgh, warden of the Welsh marches, with
 another hundred soldiers under his command, and sent the bishop of
 Chester to William the Lion with a request that the term fixed for
 answering his demands might be extended to Michaelmas.[345] Having
 taken these precautions to secure England from attack, John again
 crossed the sea; on June 2 he was at Bonneville.[346]
 
 At the announcement of John’s intention to return, Philip had either
 compelled or persuaded the Lusignans to suspend hostilities in
 Poitou.[347] A period of negotiation followed; Philip remonstrating
 with John about his conduct towards the Lusignans, and urging him to
 make them restitution; John, in his turn, remonstrating with Philip
 for his constant aggressions and his interference with the internal
 affairs of John’s duchies. Several personal interviews seem to have
 taken place between the kings;[348] before the end of June the treaty
 of Ascension-tide 1200 was confirmed; and on the last day of that month
 John, by Philip’s invitation, went to Paris, and was there lodged and
 entertained for several days in the royal palace, which Philip vacated
 for his convenience.[349]
 
 This temporary pacification was effected by a promise on John’s part
 that the quarrel between him and the Lusignans should be tried and
 settled fairly in his court as duke of Aquitaine.[350] Towards the
 end of July he went to Chinon; there he spent the greater part of
 the next six weeks,[351] and it was probably there that he summoned
 the Lusignans to the promised trial. But meanwhile the Lusignans had
 discovered that the trial which he designed was something wholly
 different from that which Philip had demanded on their behalf.
 John, before he left England, had determined to appeal “the barons
 of Poitou”--that is, no doubt, the Lusignans and their friends--on
 a general charge of treason against his late brother and himself,
 and challenge them to ordeal of battle with a number of champions
 specially chosen for the purpose. This project was perfectly legal;
 the ordeal of battle, though it was beginning to be discountenanced
 by public opinion under the influence of the Church, was still
 recognized as a lawful method of deciding upon a charge of treason.
 But a simultaneous challenge to so large a number of men, and men,
 too, of such high rank and personal distinction as the Lusignans
 and their allies, was a startling innovation upon feudal tradition
 and practice, and unwarranted by historical precedent. Moreover,
 there was in the scheme another feature which would make it doubly
 offensive to the barons concerned. The champions against whom they
 were called upon to prove their loyalty are described as “picked men,
 practised in the art of duelling, whom the king had hired and brought
 with him from his dominions on both sides of the sea.”[352] That is,
 they were professional champions--men who made a business of hiring
 themselves out to fight the battles of any one who either could not
 or would not fight in his own person, but who could afford to pay for
 an efficient substitute. Such hired champions, of course, in every
 case represented the person who hired them; in the present case they
 would have represented the king; yet nobles like the Lusignans, two
 of whose brothers had been, no less than John himself, crowned and
 anointed sovereigns, could not but feel it an intolerable insult to
 be challenged, even in a king’s name, by creatures such as these. The
 accused barons all alike refused to come to John’s court, “saying that
 they would answer to no one save to their peers.”[353] It seems that on
 a fresh remonstrance from Philip, John again consented, or pretended to
 consent, to a trial such as they demanded; but he was very unwilling to
 fix a day; and when he did fix one, he refused to give the defendants a
 safe conduct, without which, of course, they would not stir from their
 homes.[354]
 
 [Sidenote: 1201–1202]
 
 Again Philip intervened, and again John promised redress. This time
 apparently Philip deemed it advisable to require security for the
 fulfilment of the promise. The security which he asked for, however,
 was more than John could reasonably be expected to give; it seems
 to have been nothing less than three of the most important castles
 in Normandy--those of Falaise, Arques, and “Andely,” that is,
 Château-Gaillard. In December John summoned Archbishop Hubert over from
 England, and sent him to “make his excuses” to the French king;[355]
 and Hubert so far succeeded that after Christmas John was able to
 venture into Aquitaine. Early in February 1202 he met the king of
 Navarre at Angoulême, and made with him a treaty of close offensive and
 defensive alliance.[356]
 
 It was arranged that John and Philip should hold a
 conference--seemingly on March 25--at Boutavant. John, it appears,
 kept, or at least was ready to keep, the appointment; but Philip either
 was or pretended to be afraid of venturing into Norman territory, and
 would not advance beyond Gouleton. Thither John came across the river
 to meet him.[357] No agreement was arrived at. Finally, Philip cited
 John to appear in Paris fifteen days after Easter,[358] at the court of
 his overlord the king of France, to stand to its judgement, to answer
 to his lord for his misdoings, and undergo the sentence of his peers.
 The citation was addressed to John as count of Anjou and Poitou and
 duke of Aquitaine;[359] the Norman duchy was not mentioned in it. This
 omission was clearly intentional; when John answered the citation by
 reminding Philip that he was duke of Normandy, and as such, in virtue
 of ancient agreement between the kings and the dukes, not bound to go
 to any meeting with the king of France save on the borders of their
 respective territories, Philip retorted that he had summoned not the
 duke of Normandy but the duke of Aquitaine, and that his rights over
 the latter were not to be annulled by the accidental union of the
 two dignities in one person.[360] John then promised that he would
 appear before the court in Paris on the appointed day, and give up
 to Philip two small castles, Thillier and Boutavant, as security
 for his submitting to its decision. April 28 passed, and both these
 promises remained unfulfilled.[361] One English writer asserts that
 thereupon “the assembled court of the king of France adjudged the king
 of England to be deprived of all his land which he and his forefathers
 had hitherto held of the king of France”;[362] but there is reason to
 think that this statement is erroneous, and derived from a false report
 put forth by Philip Augustus for political purposes two or three years
 later.[363] It is certain that after the date of this alleged sentence,
 negotiations still went on; “great and excellent mediators” endeavoured
 to arrange a pacification;[364] and Philip himself, according to his
 own account, had another interview with John, at which he used all
 his powers of persuasion to bring him to submission, but in vain.
 Then the French king, by the advice of his barons, formally “defied”
 his rebellious vassal;[365] in a sudden burst of wrath he ordered the
 archbishop of Canterbury--evidently one of the mediators just referred
 to--out of his territories, and dashing after him with such forces
 as he had at hand, began hostilities by a raid upon Boutavant, which
 he captured and burned.[366] Even after this, if we may trust his
 own report, he sent four knights to John to make a final attempt at
 reconciliation; but John would not see them.[367]
 
 The war which followed was characteristic of both kings alike. Philip’s
 attack took the form not of a regular invasion, but of a series of
 raids upon eastern Normandy, whereby in the course of the next three
 months[368] he made himself master of Thillier, Lions, Longchamp,
 La Ferté-en-Braye, Orgueil, Gournay, Mortemer, Aumale and the town
 and county of Eu.[369] John was throughout the same period flitting
 ceaselessly about within a short distance of all these places;[370]
 but Philip never came up with him, and he never but once came up
 with Philip. On July 7 the French king laid siege to Radepont, some
 ten miles to the south-east of Rouen. John, who was at Bonport, let
 him alone for a week, and then suddenly appeared before the place,
 whereupon Philip immediately withdrew.[371] John, however, made no
 attempt at pursuit. According to his wont, he let matters take their
 course till he saw a favourable opportunity for retaliation. At the end
 of the month the opportunity came.
 
 [Sidenote: 1202]
 
 At the conclusion of the treaty of Gouleton in May 1200 Arthur, after
 doing homage to his uncle for Britanny, had been by him restored to the
 guardianship of the French king.[372] The death of the boy’s mother
 in September 1201[373] left him more than ever exposed to Philip’s
 influence; and it was no doubt as a measure of precaution, in view
 of the approaching strife between the kings, that John on March 27,
 1202--two days after his meeting with Philip at Gouleton--summoned
 his “beloved nephew Arthur” to come and “do right” to him at Argentan
 at the octave of Easter.[374] The summons probably met with no more
 obedience than did Philip’s summons to John; and before the end of
 April Philip had bound Arthur securely to his side by promising him the
 hand of his infant daughter Mary.[375] This promise was ratified by a
 formal betrothal at Gournay, after the capture of that place by the
 French; at the same time Philip made Arthur a knight, and gave him the
 investiture of all the Angevin dominions except Normandy.[376] Towards
 the end of July Philip despatched Arthur, with a force of two hundred
 French knights, to join the Lusignans in an attack on Poitou. The
 barons of Britanny and of Berry had been summoned to meet him at Tours;
 but the only allies who did meet him there were three of the Lusignans
 and Savaric de Mauléon, with some three hundred knights. Overruling the
 caution of the boy duke, who wished to wait for reinforcements from
 his own duchy, the impetuous southerners urged an immediate attack
 upon Mirebeau, their object being to capture Queen Eleanor, who was
 known to be there,[377] and whom they rightly regarded as the mainstay
 of John’s power in Aquitaine. Eleanor, however, became aware of their
 project in time to despatch a letter to her son, begging him to come
 to her rescue. He was already moving southward when her courier met
 him on July 30 as he was approaching Le Mans. By marching day and
 night he and his troops covered the whole distance between Le Mans
 and Mirebeau--eighty miles at the least--in forty-eight hours, and
 appeared on August 1 before the besieged castle.[378] The enemies had
 already taken the outer ward and thrown down all the gates save one,
 deeming their own valour a sufficient safeguard against John’s expected
 attack.[379] So great was their self-confidence that they even marched
 out to meet him. Like most of those who at one time or another fought
 against John, they underrated the latent capacities of their adversary.
 They were driven back into the castle, hotly pursued by his troops, who
 under the guidance of William des Roches forced their way in after the
 fugitives, and were in a short time masters of the place. The whole of
 the French and Poitevin forces were either slain or captured; and among
 the prisoners were the three Lusignans, and Arthur.[380]
 
 Philip was at that moment busy with the siege of Arques; on the
 receipt of these tidings he left it and turned southward,[381] but he
 failed, or perhaps did not attempt, to intercept John, who, bringing
 his prisoners with him, made his way leisurely back to Falaise.[382]
 There he imprisoned Arthur in the castle,[383] and despatched his
 victorious troops against Arthur’s duchy; they captured Dol and
 Fougères, and harried the country as far as Rennes.[384] Philip, after
 ravaging Touraine, fired the city of Tours and took the citadel;
 immediately afterwards he withdrew to his own territories, as by that
 time John was again at Chinon. As soon as Philip was gone, John in his
 turn entered Tours and wrested the citadel from the French garrison
 left there by his rival; but his success was won at the cost of another
 conflagration which, an English chronicler declares, was never forgiven
 him by the citizens and the barons of Touraine.[385]
 
 For the moment, however, he was in luck. In Aquitaine he seemed in a
 fair way to carry all before him without striking a blow. Angoulême
 had passed into his hands by the death of his father-in-law on June
 17.[386] Guy of Limoges had risen in revolt again, but at the end of
 August or early in September he was captured.[387] The Lusignans,
 from their prison at Caen, made overtures for peace, and by dint of
 protestations and promises succeeded ere long in regaining their
 liberty, of course on the usual conditions of surrendering their
 castles and giving hostages for their loyalty.[388] It was almost
 equally a matter of course that as soon as they were free they began
 intriguing against John.[389] But the chronic intrigues of the south
 were in reality, as John himself seems to have discovered, a far less
 serious danger than the disaffection in his northern dominions. This
 last evil was undoubtedly, so far as Normandy was concerned, owing in
 great measure to John’s own fault. He had entrusted the defence of
 the Norman duchy to his mercenaries under the command of a Provençal
 captain whose real name is unknown, who seems to have adopted for
 himself the nickname of “Lou Pescaire,” “The Fisherman”--which the
 Normans apparently corrupted into “Louvrekaire”--and who habitually
 treated his employer’s peaceable subjects in a fashion in which other
 commanders would have shrunk from treating avowed enemies.[390] Side
 by side with the discontent thus caused among the people there was
 a rapid growth of treason among the Norman barons;--treason fraught
 with far greater peril than the treason of the nobles of Aquitaine,
 because it was more persistent and more definite in its aim; because it
 was at once less visible and tangible and more deeply rooted; because
 it spread in silence and wrought in darkness; and because, while no
 southern rebel ever really fought for anything but his own hand, the
 northern traitors were in close concert with Philip Augustus. John
 knew not whom to trust; he could, in fact, trust no one; and herein
 lay the explanation of his restless movements, his unaccountable
 wanderings, his habit of journeying through bye-ways, his constant
 changes of plan.[391] Moreover, besides the Aquitanian rebels, the
 Norman traitors, and the French enemy, there were the Breton partizans
 of Arthur to be reckoned with. These had now found a leader in William
 des Roches, who, when he saw that he could not prevail upon John to
 set Arthur at liberty, openly withdrew from the king’s service, and
 organized a league of the Breton nobles against him.
 
 [Sidenote: 1202–1203]
 
 These Bretons, reinforced by some barons from Anjou and Maine,
 succeeded on October 29 in gaining possession of Angers.[392] It may
 have been to watch for an opportunity of dislodging them that John, who
 was then at Le Mans, went to spend a fortnight at Saumur and another at
 Chinon. Early in December, however, he fell back upon Normandy,[393]
 and while the intruders were harrying his ancestral counties with fire
 and sword,[394] he kept Christmas with his queen at Caen, “faring
 sumptuously every day, and prolonging his morning slumbers till
 dinner-time.”[395] It seems that shortly afterwards the queen returned
 to Chinon, and that in the middle of January 1203 the enemies at Angers
 were discovered to be planning an attempt to capture her there. John
 hurried to Le Mans, only stopping at Alençon to dine with Count Robert
 and endeavour to secure his suspected loyalty by confirming him in all
 his possessions. No sooner had they parted, however, than Robert rode
 off to the French court, did homage to Philip, and admitted a French
 garrison into Alençon. While John, thus placed between two fires, was
 hesitating whether to go on or to go back, Peter des Préaux succeeded
 in getting the queen out of Chinon and bringing her to her husband
 at Le Mans; thence they managed to make their way back in safety to
 Falaise.[396]
 
 [Sidenote: 1203]
 
 This incident may have suggested to John that it was time to take
 some decisive step towards getting rid of Arthur’s claims. According
 to one English chronicler, some of the king’s counsellors had already
 been urging this matter upon him for some time past. They pointed out
 that so long as Arthur lived, and was neither physically nor legally
 incapacitated for ruling, the Bretons would never be quiet, and no
 lasting peace with France would be possible; and they therefore
 suggested to the king a horrible scheme for rendering Arthur incapable
 of being any longer a source of danger. The increasing boldness of the
 Bretons at last provoked John into consenting to this project, and he
 despatched three of his servants to Falaise to put out the eyes of the
 captive. Two of these men chose to leave the king’s service rather
 than obey him; the third went to Falaise as he was bidden, but found
 it impossible to fulfil his errand; Arthur’s struggles were backed by
 the very soldiers who guarded him, and the fear of a mutiny drove their
 commander, Hubert de Burgh, to prevent the execution of an order which
 he felt that the king would soon have cause to regret. He gave out,
 however, that the order had been fulfilled, and that Arthur had died in
 consequence. The effect of this announcement proved at once the wisdom
 of Hubert and the folly of those to whose counsel John had yielded.
 The fury of the Bretons became boundless; they vowed never to leave a
 moment’s peace to the tyrant who had committed such a ghastly crime
 upon their duke, his own nephew; and Hubert soon found it necessary,
 for John’s own sake, to confess his fraud and demonstrate to friends
 and foes alike that Arthur was still alive and uninjured.[397] John
 himself now attempted to deal with Arthur in another way. Being at
 Falaise at the end of January 1203,[398] he caused his nephew to be
 brought before him, and “addressed him with fair words, promising
 him great honours if he would forsake the king of France and cleave
 faithfully to his uncle and rightful lord.” Arthur, however, rejected
 these overtures with scorn, vowing that there should be no peace unless
 the whole Angevin dominions, including England, were surrendered to him
 as Richard’s lawful heir. John retorted by transferring his prisoner
 from Falaise to Rouen and confining him, more strictly than ever, in
 the citadel.[399]
 
 Thenceforth Arthur disappears from history. What was his end no one
 knows. The chronicle of the abbey of Margan in South Wales, a chronicle
 of which the only known manuscript ends with the year 1232, and of
 which the portion dealing with the early years of John’s reign was not
 compiled in its present form till after 1221 at earliest, asserts that
 on Maunday Thursday (April 3) 1203, John, “after dinner, being drunk
 and possessed by the devil,” slew his nephew with his own hand and
 tied a great stone to the body, which he flung into the Seine; that
 a fisherman’s net brought it up again, and that, being recognized,
 it was buried secretly, “for fear of the tyrant,” in the church of
 Notre-Dame-des-Prés, near Rouen.[400] William the Breton, in his poem
 on Philip Augustus, completed about 1216, relates in detail, but
 without date, how John took Arthur out alone with him by night in a
 boat on the Seine, plunged a sword into his body, rowed along for three
 miles with the corpse, and then threw it overboard.[401] Neither of
 these writers gives any authority for his story. The earliest authority
 of precisely ascertained date to which we can trace the assertion
 that Arthur was murdered is a document put forth by a personage whose
 word, on any subject whatever, is as worthless as the word of John
 himself--King Philip Augustus of France. In 1216--about the time when
 his Breton historiographer’s poem was completed--Philip affected to
 regard it as a notorious fact that John had, either in person or by
 another’s hand, murdered his nephew. But Philip at the same time
 went on to assert that John had been summoned to trial before the
 supreme court of France, and by it condemned to forfeiture of all his
 dominions, on that same charge of murder; and this latter assertion is
 almost certainly false.[402] Seven months after the date assigned by
 the Margan annalist to Arthur’s death--in October 1203--Philip owned
 himself ignorant whether the duke of Britanny were alive or not.[403]
 Clearly, therefore, it was not as the avenger of Arthur’s murder that
 Philip took the field at the end of April. On the other hand, Philip
 had never made the slightest attempt to obtain Arthur’s release; early
 in 1203, if not before, he was almost openly laying his plans in
 anticipation of Arthur’s permanent effacement from politics.[404] The
 interests of the French king were in fact no less concerned in Arthur’s
 imprisonment, and more concerned in his death, than were the interests
 of John himself. John’s one remaining chance of holding Philip and
 the Bretons in check was to keep them in uncertainty whether Arthur
 were alive or dead, in order to prevent the Bretons from adopting any
 decided policy, and hamper the French king in his dealings with them
 and with the Angevin and Poitevin rebels by compelling him to base his
 alliance with them on conditions avowedly liable to be annulled at any
 moment by Arthur’s reappearance on the political scene.