If, therefore, Arthur—as is most probable—was now

really dead, whether he had indeed perished a victim of one

of those fits of ungovernable fury in which (and in which

alone) the Angevin counts sometimes added blunder to crime,

* See Revue historique, vol. xxxii. pp. 33-72 and 29.1-31 1. M. Bémont’s

conclusion on this point, though disputed by M. P. Guilhiermoz in Bibliothèque

de l'Acole des Chartes, vol. ix. (1899), pp. 45-85, still holds the field. Cf.

Revue hist, vol. lxxi. (1899), pp. 33-41, and Bibl. de l'Ecole des Chartes, vol. lx.

pp. 363-72.

* Delisle, Catal. des Actes de Phil.-Aug. No. 783. According to R.

Coggeshall, pp. 144, 145, Philip virtually declared himself still ignorant on the

point six months later still.

* Thus in March he received the liege homage of Maurice of Craon “for the

time of Arthur's imprisonment”; should Arthur be released and adhere to his

engagements with Philip, Maurice was to be Arthur's liegeman as he had been

of old; should Arthur break faith with Philip, then Maurice was to adhere to

the latter; should Arthur die, then Maurice was to remain a liegeman of Philip.

In like manner the castles of Brissac and Chemillé were in the following October

granted by Philip to Guy of Thouars, “saving the rights of Arthur if he be

still alive,” Delisle, Catal. des Actes de Phil.-Aug. Nos. 752, 783.


or whether he had died a natural death from sickness in 1203

prison, or by a fall in attempting to escape, it would be

equally politic on John's part to let rumour do its worst

rather than suffer any gleam of light to penetrate the

mystery which shrouded the captive's fate.

John's chance, however, was a desperate one. A fortnight April 20

after Easter the French king attacked and took Saumur.”

Moving southward, he was joined by some Poitevins and

Bretons, with whose help he captured sundry castles in

Aquitaine. Thence he went back to the Norman border, to

be welcomed at Alençon by its count, and to lay siege to

Conches.” John, who was then at Falaise, sent William the

Marshal to Conches, to beg that Philip would “have pity on

him and make peace.” Philip refused ; John hurried back

to Rouen, to find both city and castle in flames *—whether

kindled by accident or by treachery there is nothing to

show. Conches was taken ; Vaudreuil was betrayed; the

few other castles in the county of Evreux which had not

already passed, either by cession, conquest, or treason, into

Philip's hands shared the like fate,” while John flitted

restlessly up and down between Rouen and various places in

the neighbourhood," but made no direct effort to check the

progress of the invader. Messenger after messenger came

to him with the same story: “The king of France is in

your land as an enemy; he is taking your castles; he is

binding your seneschals to their horses' tails and dragging

them shamefully to prison ; he is dealing with your goods at

his own pleasure.” John heard them all with an unmoved

countenance, and dismissed them all with one unvarying

reply: “Let him alonel Some day I shall win back all

that he is winning from me now.”

It was by diplomacy that John hoped to parry the

attack which he knew he could not repel by force. Early

1 These were the alternative versions proposed by John's friends, according

to M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 95.

* Chron. S. Albini Andeg. a. 1203.

* Rigord, c. 14o ; wrongly dated.

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 12675-720.

* Cf. Rigord, c. 14o ; R. Coggeshall, p. 143; and R. Wendover, vol. iii.

p. 172. * Itin. a. 5.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 171, 172.


in the year he had complained to the Pope of the long

course of insult and aggression pursued towards him by

Philip, and begged Innocent to interfere in his behalf."

Thereupon Philip, in his turn, sent messengers and letters to

the Pope, giving his own version of his relations with John,

and endeavouring to justify his own conduct.” On May

26 Innocent announced to both kings that he was about

to despatch the abbots of Casamario, Trois-Fontaines and

Dun as commissioners to arbitrate upon the matters in

dispute between them.” These envoys seem to have been

delayed on their journey; and when they reached France

they, for some time, found it impossible to ascertain whether

Philip would or would not accept their arbitration. When

at last he met them in council at Mantes on August 26,

he told them bluntly that he “was not bound to take his

orders from the Apostolic See as to his rights over a fief

and a vassal of his own, and that the matter in dispute

between the two kings was no business of the Pope’s.” “

John meanwhile had, on August 1 I, suddenly quitted his

passive attitude and laid siege to Alençon ; but he retired on

Philip's approach four days later. An attempt which he

made to regain Brezolles was equally ineffectual.” Philip,

on the other hand, was now resolved to bring the war to a

crisis. It was probably straight from the council at Mantes

that he marched to the siege of Château-Gaillard."

Château-Gaillard was a fortress of far other importance

than any of the castles which both parties had been so

lightly winning, losing and winning again, during the last

ten years. It was the key of the Seine above Rouen, the

bulwark raised by Richard Coeur de Lion to protect his

favourite city against attack from France. Not till the

fortifications which commanded the river at Les Andelys

were either destroyed or in his own hands could Philip hope

1203

1 Innoc. III. Epp. 1. vi. No. 163; dated Anagni, Oct. 29, 1203.

* Ib. No. 167 (same date).

* Ib. Nos. 68, 69. * Ib. No. 163.

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. cc. 117, 118. The dates of the siege of Alençon

come from Itin. a. 5.

* The siege of Château-Gaillard was begun before the end of August. See

below, p. 96.


to win the Norman capital. And those fortifications were

of no common order. Their builder was the greatest, as he

was the last, of the “great builders” of Anjou ; and his “fair

castle on the Rock of Andelys " was at once the supreme

outcome of their architectural genius, and the earliest and

most perfect example in Europe of the new developement

which the Crusaders' study of the mighty works of Byzantine

or even earlier conquerors, quickened and illuminated as it

was by the exigencies of their own struggle with the Infidels,

had given to the science of military architecture in the East.

During the past year John had added to his brother's castle

a chapel with an undercroft, placed at the south-eastern

corner of the second ward." The fortress which nature and

art had combined to make impregnable was well stocked

with supplies of every kind ; moreover, it was one of the few

places in Normandy which Philip had no hope of winning,

and John no fear of losing, through treason on the part of its

commandant. Roger de Lacy, to whom John had given it in

charge, was an English baron who had no stake in Normandy,

and whose personal interest was therefore bound up with that

of the English king ; he was also a man of high character

and dauntless courage.” Nothing short of a siege of the

most determined kind would avail against the “Saucy

Castle”; and on that siege Philip now concentrated all his

forces and all his skill. As the right bank of the Seine at

that point was entirely commanded by the castle and its

neighbour fortification, the walled town—also built by

Richard—known as the New or Lesser Andely, while the

river itself was doubly barred by a stockade across its bed,

close under the foot of the Rock, and by a strong tower on

an island in mid-stream just below the town, he was obliged

to encamp in the meadows on the opposite shore. The

stockade, however, was soon broken down by the daring of a

few young Frenchmen; and the waterway being thus cleared

for the transport of materials, he was enabled to construct

below the island a pontoon, by means of which he could

throw a portion of his troops across the river to form the

1 Will. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 129; Philipp. 1. vii. vv. 739-47.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 18o.

1203


1203

siege of the New Andely, place the island garrison between

two fires, and at once keep open his own communications

and cut off those of the besieged with both sides of the river

alike."

These things seem to have been done towards the end

of August. On the 27th and 28th of that month John was

at Montfort, a castle some five and twenty miles from

Rouen, held by one of his few faithful barons, Hugh of

Gournay. On the 3oth, if not the 29th, he and all his

available forces were back at Rouen, ready to attempt on

that very night the relief of Les Andelys.” The king's plan

was a masterpiece of ingenuity; and the fact that the elaborate

preparations needed for its execution were made so rapidly

and so secretly as to escape detection by an enemy so close

at hand goes far to show how mistaken are the charges of

sloth and incapacity which, even in his own day, men brought

against “John Softsword.”* He had arranged that a force

of three hundred knights, three thousand mounted men-at-

arms, and four thousand foot, under the command of William

the Marshal, with a band of mercenaries under Lou Pescaire,

should march by night from Rouen along the left bank of

the Seine and fall, under cover of darkness, upon the portion

of the French army which still lay on that side of the river.

Meanwhile, seventy transport vessels which had been built

by Richard to serve either for sea or river traffic, and as

many more boats as could be collected, were to be laden

with provisions for the distressed garrison of the island fort,

and convoyed up the stream by a flotilla of small war-

ships manned by “pirates” under a chief named Alan and

carrying, besides their own daring and reckless crews, a force

of three thousand Flemings. Two hundred strokes of the

oar, John reckoned, would bring these ships to the French

pontoon ; they must break it if they could ; if not, they

* Rigord, c. 141 ; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 122; Philipp. 1. vii. vv. 29-

I4O. * Itin. a. 5

* “Johannem Mollegladium,” Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 93. This nickname

is no doubt a translation of one which must have been applied to John in French,

though unluckily its vernacular form is lost. A friend has suggested that “if the

phrase had any English equivalent, it would probably be something embracing a

more direct metaphor than “Soft-sword'– something like “Tin-sword,” or,

better still, if the thirteenth century knew of putty, “John Putty-sword.’”




iii. JOHN “SoFTS word" 97

could at least co-operate with the Marshal and Lou Pescaire

in cutting off the northern division of the French host from

its comrades and supplies on the left bank, and throw into

the island fort provisions which would enable it to hold out

till John himself should come to its rescue.

One error brought the scheme to ruin—an error neither

of strategy nor of conduct, but of scientific knowledge. John

had miscalculated the time at which, on that night, the Seine

would be navigable up-stream; and his counsellors evidently

shared his mistake till it was brought home to them by

experience. The land forces achieved their march without

hindrance, and at the appointed hour, shortly before day-

break, fell upon the French camp with such a sudden and

furious onslaught that the whole of its occupants fled across

the pontoon, which broke under their weight. But the

fleet, which had been intended to arrive at the same time,

was unable to make way against the tide, and before it could

reach its destination the French had rallied on the northern

bank, repaired the pontoon, recrossed it in full force, and

routed John's troops. The ships, when they at last came up,

thus found themselves unsupported in their turn, and though

they made a gallant fight they were beaten back with heavy

loss. In the flush of victory one young Frenchman con-

trived to set fire to the island fort; it surrendered, and the

whole population of the New Andely fled in a panic to

Château-Gaillard, leaving their town to be occupied by

Philip." The Saucy Castle itself still remained to be won.

Knowing, however, that for this nothing was likely to avail

but a blockade, which was now practically formed on two

sides by his occupation of the island fort and the Lesser

Andely, Philip on the very next day” set off to make

another attempt on Radepont, whence he had been driven

away by John a year before. This time John made no

effort to dislodge him. It was not worth while ; the one

thing that mattered now was Château-Gaillard. Thither

1 W. Armor. Philipp. 1. vii. vv. 140-393. Cf. Gesta P. A. c. 123.

* Rigord, c. 141, says Philip laid siege to Radepont on August 31. John's

attempt to relieve Les Andelys, being made from Rouen, cannot have been

earlier than August 29, more probably 30, ſtin. a. 5.

H

1203

A


1203

Philip, after receiving the surrender of Radepont, returned

towards the end of September to complete the blockade."

No second attempt to relieve it was possible. It may

have been for the purpose of endeavouring to collect fresh

troops from the western districts, which were as yet un-

touched by the war, that John about this time visited his

old county of Mortain, and even went as far as Dol,” which

his soldiers had taken in the previous year. But his military

resources in Normandy were exhausted. The Marshal

bluntly advised him to give up the struggle. “Sire,” said

William, “you have not enough friends; if you provoke

your enemies to fight, you will diminish your own force;

and when a man provokes his enemies, it is but just if they

make him rue it.” “Whoso is afraid, let him flee "

answered John. “I myself will not flee for a year; and if

indeed it came to fleeing, I should not think of saving

myself otherwise than you would, wheresoever you might

be.” “I know that well, sire,” replied William ; “but you,

who are wise and mighty and of high lineage, and whose

work it is to govern us all, have not been careful to avoid

irritating people. If you had, it would have been better for

us all. Methinks I speak not without reason.”* The king,

“as if a sword had struck him to the heart,” spoke not a

word, but rushed to his chamber; next morning he was

nowhere to be found ; he had gone away in a boat, almost

alone, and it was only at Bonneville that his followers

rejoined him. This was apparently at the beginning of

October.” For two months more he lingered in the duchy,

where his position was growing more hopeless day by day.

At the end of October, or early in November, he took the

decisive step of dismantling Pont-de-l'Arche, Moulineaux,

and Montfort,” three castles which, next to Château-

Gaillard, would be of the greatest value to the French for

* Rigord, c. 141 ; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 121 ; Philipp. 1. vii. vv. 4oo-2.

* Itin. a. 5. He was at Dol September 19-22.

* Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 12721-42.

* Ib. vv. 12743-67. John was at Rouen from October 4 to 7, when he

went to Bonneville; Itin. a. 5. The poet goes on with an account of the

king's wanderings till “s'en vint a Rouen arere,” but his itinerary does not

agree with the authentic one at any period of this year.

* W. Armor. Philipp. 1. vii. vv. 827-9.


III John “SoFTSWORD." 99

an advance upon Rouen. To Rouen itself he returned once

more on November 9, and stayed there four days." On

the 12th he set out for Bonneville, accompanied by the

queen, and telling his friends that he intended to go to

England to seek counsel and aid from his barons and people

there, and would soon return. In reality his departure from

the capital was caused by a rumour which had reached him

of a conspiracy among the Norman barons to deliver him

up to Philip Augustus. At Bonneville, therefore, he lodged

not in the town but in the castle, and only for a few hours;

the Marshal and one or two others alone were warned of his

intention to set forth again before daybreak, and the little

party had got a start of seven leagues on the road to Caen

before their absence was discovered by the rest of the suite,

of whom “some went after them, and the more part went

back.”” Still John was reluctant to leave Normandy; he

went south to Domfront and west to Vire before he again

returned to the coast at Barfleur on November 28 ; and even

then he spent five days at Gonneville and one at Cherbourg

before he finally took ship at Barfleur on December 5, to

land at Portsmouth next day.”

It was probably before he left Rouen that he addressed

a letter to the commandant of Château-Gaillard in these

terms: “We thank you for your good and faithful service,

and desire that, as much as in you lies, you will persevere

in the fidelity and homage which you owe to us; that you

may receive a worthy meed of praise from God and from

ourself, and from all who know your faithfulness. If

however—which God forbid!—you should find yourself in

such straits that you can hold out no longer, then do what-

soever our trusty and well-beloved Peter of Préaux, William

of Mortimer, and Hugh of Howels our clerk, shall bid you

in our name.” “ An English chronicler says that John

“being unwilling”—or “unable”—“to succour the besieged,

through fear of the treason of his men, went to England,

! Itin. a. 5

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 12783-818.

* Cf. Itin. a. 5 and R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 173.

* Duchesne, Hist. Worm. Scriptt. p. 1059.

* , ºf ºvº, 3

.*, *, * ſº

fºº # **

1203


Ioo JOHN LACKLAND chap

1203

1204

leaving all the Normans in a great perturbation of fear.””

It is hard to see what they feared, unless it were John's

possible vengeance, at some future time, for their universal

readiness to welcome his rival. Not one town manned its

walls, not one baron mustered his tenants and garrisoned his

castles, to withstand the invader. Some, as soon as John

was out of the country, openly made a truce with Philip for

a year, on the understanding that if not succoured by John

within that time, they would receive the French king as their

lord;” the rest stood passively looking on at the one real

struggle of the war, the struggle for Château-Gaillard.

At length, on March 6, 1204, the Saucy Castle fell.”

Its fall opened the way for a French advance upon Rouen;

but before taking this further step Philip deemed it politic

to let the Pope's envoy, the abbot of Casamario, complete

his mission by going to speak with John. The abbot was

received at a great council in London at the end of March; *

the result was his return to France early in April, in

company with the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops of

Norwich and Ely, and the earls of Pembroke and Leicester,

all charged with a commission “to sound the French king,

and treat with him about terms of peace.” On the French

king's side the negotiation was a mere form ; to whatever

conditions the envoys proposed, he always found some

objection; and his own demands were such as John's

representatives dared not attempt to lay before their

sovereign—Arthur's restoration, or, if he were dead, the

surrender of his sister Eleanor, and the cession to Philip,

as her suzerain and guardian, of the whole continental

dominions of the Angevin house.” Finally, Philip dropped

* “Rege vero Johanne nullum praesidium ferre obsessis volente, eo quod

suorum proditionem semper timeret, infra hyemem, mense Decembri, in Angliam

trans fretavit, omnes Normannos in magna timoris perturbatione relinquens,” R.

Coggeshall, p. 144. It seems probable that “volente” may be a clerical error

for “valente.”

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 173, 174. * Rigord, c. 141.

* Gerv. Cant. (vol. ii. p. 95) says the council was held “in London’’; R.

Coggeshall (p. 144) describes its result, the embassy to France, as taking place

“after Mid-Lent,” i.e. after April 1. The only date about this time when

John was in London was March 22-29; Itin. a. 5.

* Cf. R. Coggeshall, pp. 144, 145; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. 95, 96, and Hist.

de G. le Mar, vv. 12854-68.


the mask altogether, and made a direct offer, not to John,

but to John's Norman subjects, including the two lay

ambassadors. All those, he said, who within a year and a

day would come to him and do him homage for their lands

should receive confirmation of their tenure from him. Here-

upon the two English earls, after consulting together, gave

him five hundred marks each, on the express understanding

that he was to leave them unmolested in the enjoyment of

their Norman lands for a twelvemonth and a day, and that

at the expiration of that time they would come and do

homage for those lands to him, if John had not meanwhile

regained possession of the duchy." Neither William the

Marshal nor his colleague had any thought of betraying or

deserting John ; as the Marshal's biographer says, they “did

not wish to be false”; and when they reached England they

seem to have frankly told John what they had done, and to

have received no blame for it.”

The return of the English embassy was followed by a

letter from the commandant of Rouen—John’s “trusty and

well-beloved ” Peter of Préaux—informing the English king

that “all the castles and towns from Bayeux to Anet” had

promised Philip that they would surrender to him as soon

as he was master of Rouen, an event which, Peter plainly

hinted, was not likely to be long delayed.” This information

about the western towns was probably incorrect, for it was

on western Normandy that Philip made his next attack. John

meanwhile had in January imposed a scutage of two marks

and a half per shield throughout England, and, in addition,

a tax of a seventh of moveables, which, though it fell upon

all classes alike, the clergy included, he is said to have

demanded expressly on the ground of the barons' desertion

of him in Normandy.” The hire of a mercenary force was

of course the object to which the proceeds of both these

taxes were destined; but they took time to collect, and

John soon fell back upon a readier, though less trustworthy,

1 Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 12869-98. Cf. the Marshal's charter to Philip

(dated May 1204) in Cal. Doc. France, vol. i. p. 475.

* Hist, de G. le Mar, vv. 12934-66. * Ib. v.v. 12905-20.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 173, 175.

I204


1204

resource, and summoned the feudal host of England to meet

him at Portsmouth, seemingly in the first week of May. It

gathered, however, so slowly that he was obliged to give

up the expedition." Philip was about this time besieging

Falaise;” he won it, and went on in triumph to receive the

surrender of Domfront, Séez, Lisieux, Caen, Bayeux, Cou-

tances, Barfleur, and Cherbourg.” He was then joined by

John's late ally, the count of Boulogne, as well as by Guy of

Thouars, the widower of Constance of Britanny; and these

two, their forces swelled by a troop of mercenaries who had

transferred their services from John to Philip after the

surrender of Falaise, completed the conquest of south-western

Normandy,” while the French king at last set his face towards

Rouen. He was not called upon to besiege it, nor even to

threaten it with a siege. On June 1 Peter de Préaux made

in his own name, and in the names of the commandants of

Arques and Verneuil, a truce with Philip, promising that these

two fortresses and Rouen should surrender if not succoured

within thirty days.” The three castellans sent notice of this

arrangement to John, who, powerless and penniless as he was,

scornfully bade them “look for no help from him, but do

whatsoever seemed to them best.”" It seemed to them best

not even to wait for the expiration of the truce; Rouen

surrendered on June 24, and in a few days Arques and

Verneuil followed its example.”

Thus did Normandy forsake—as Anjou and Maine

had already forsaken—the heir of its ancient rulers for the

king of the French. Philip's next undertaking, the conquest

* Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 12921-6. John was at Portsmouth on May 5,

and at Porchester on May 5-7, 1204. The story may, however, be a mere

confusion with what happened in June 1205.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 145, dates Philip's siege of Falaise Easter (April 25);

but Rigord, a better authority on the point, places it in the May campaign

(c. 142).

* Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 145; Rigord, c. 142; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 131,

and Philipp. 1. viii. vv. 9-39.

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 131.

* Duchesne, Hist. Worm. Script. pp. 1057-9.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 181. That John was penniless may be inferred

from the desertion of his mercenaries.

* Rigord, c. 142. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 146, and Hist, des Ducs de

Normandie, p. 98.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 146.


of Aquitaine, was likely to be considerably facilitated

by the fact that there was no longer a third person

who could claim to stand between him and his rival

as lawful lady of the land; for Eleanor had died on

April 1.” In the middle of August Philip marched upon

Poitou. Robert of Turnham, John's seneschal there, did

what he could for its defence; but he was powerless against

the indifference of the people and the active hostility of the

Lusignans and William des Roches;” and in a few weeks

the whole county, except La Rochelle, Niort, and Thouars,

had submitted to the French king.” There, however,

Philip's progress ended. He could not touch the county of

Angoulême, for it belonged not to John, but to John's wife;

while his very successes turned Gascony against him, for the

Gascons were quick to perceive how much greater would be

their chances of practical independence under a king who

would henceforth be parted from them by the whole width

of the Bay of Biscay, than under one whose territories now

stretched without a break from the Channel to their own

border. Nor had John failed to recognize that in this

quarter lay his best hope—at the moment indeed his only

hope—of checking Philip's advance. He at once devoted

twenty-eight thousand marks of the treasure which he was

gathering in England to the hire of thirty thousand soldiers,

who were to be enrolled for his service in Gascony by one

Moreve, a brother of the archbishop of Bordeaux, in readiness

to join the forces of the king himself whenever he should

land on their coast.” From Poitiers, therefore, Philip returned

to his own dominions, and no further military movement on

either side was made throughout the winter.

In the middle of January 1205 John called the bishops

and barons of England to a council in London.” His

nominal reason for so doing was that he feared Philip might

attempt an invasion of England, and desired to concert

measures for its defence; but it is clear that what he really

1 Ann. Waverley, a. 1204. * R. Coggeshall, p. 146.

* Ib. ; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 181.

" * R. Coggeshall, p. 147. -

* John was in London January 16-21, 1205 (Itin. a. 6). This is evidently

the date of the council.

1204

1205


1205 .

dreaded and sought to guard against was not invasion, but

treason. The precautions which he induced the council to

support him in taking against the imaginary danger were, if

insufficient to save him from the real one, at least as good a

safeguard as could be contrived against it at the moment.

The oath of fealty to the king was taken anew by all present,

and afterwards re-administered throughout the country. “It

was also decreed that, for the general defence of the realm

and for the preservation of peace, a commune should be made

throughout the kingdom, and that all men, from the greatest

to the least, who were over twelve years of age, should swear

to keep it firmly.” The ordinance to which they swore

established constables in every shire; and in every hundred,

city, and group of lesser townships, subordinate constables

who were to lead the men of their respective “communes"

to the muster whenever they were summoned by the chief

constables, whose orders these local levies were to obey “for

the defence of the realm and the preservation of peace

against foreigners or against any other disturbers of the

same"; and whosoever should neglect the summons was to

be held guilty of high treason." At the beginning of February

John issued letters patent to the bailiffs of the east and south

coast, giving orders that no ship or boat should be allowed to

issue from or pass by the harbours under their jurisdiction,

unless by special licence from him. Besides the obvious

purpose of hindering treasonable communications with his

enemies on the continent, this order had probably another

object; the vessels thus detained were most likely appropriated

to the king's service and made to form part of a fleet which

he was gathering from various quarters” throughout the next

two months. The want of confidence between king and

barons was openly revealed in a council at Oxford, March

27 to 29; the barons made oath to John “that they

would render him due obedience,” but John was first “com-

pelled to swear that he would by their counsel maintain the

rights of the kingdom inviolate, to the utmost of his power.” “

2 Rot. P. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. 96, 97. Iº

ot. Pat, vol. i. p. 50. ... pp. 51, 52.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. 97, 98. For date see Itin. a. '6


iii. yoAN “SoFTSWORD." IoS

On Palm Sunday, April 3, John issued letters patent from

Winchester, ordering that in all the shires of England every

nine knights should “find " a tenth, and that the knights

thus provided should come to meet him in London three

weeks after Easter (that is, on May 1), “ready to go in his

service where he should bid them, and to be in his service

in defence of the realm as much as might be needful.” The

muster seems, however, to have been postponed, possibly to

await the result of an attempt which the king had been

making in the field of diplomacy, under somewhat peculiar

circumstances.

Of all John's ministers, the one whom he most disliked

and mistrusted was the one whose constitutional position

made him absolutely irremoveable from the royal counsels—

the archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert Walter. That John's

suspicions of Hubert's loyalty were unjust there can be no

doubt; but there are not wanting indications that Hubert,

whose temper was extremely masterful, and who for the six

years preceding John's accession to the throne had governed

England for Richard practically at his own sole discretion,

was inclined to press his views of policy upon Richard's

younger brother in a fashion more dictatorial than deferential,

and to magnify his own office as chief adviser of the Crown,

and his personal capabilities as a statesman and a diplo-

matist, with more emphasis than tact. Hubert had on

several occasions tried to act as mediator between John and

Philip, and his mediation had failed. . In Lent 1205 John,

while pushing on his military preparations in England,

resolved to set on foot a new diplomatic negotiation with

France which seems to have had a twofold object—first, to

keep Philip occupied so as to hinder him, at least for a short

time, from proceeding against the few fortresses north of the

Dordogne which still held out for their Angevin lord;” and

secondly, to make game of the archbishop of Canterbury.

This latter object was to be attained by keeping the project

a secret from Hubert, and carrying on the negotiations not

only without his assistance or advice, but even without his

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 55.

* Chinon, Loches, Thouars, Niort and La Rochelle.

1205


1205

knowledge. The envoys whom John selected for this mission

were his vice-chancellor, Hugh of Wells, and Earl William

the Marshal. Apparently it was given out that their journey

to France was on business of their own ; an assertion which

in the Marshal's case was true, though not the whole truth.

When John had communicated to them his private instruc-

tions, William spoke: “Now, sire, listen to me. I am not

sure of obtaining peace; and you see that my term of

truce for my Norman land is nearly expired. Unless I do

homage for it to the French king, I shall lose it ; for I see

no hope of recovering it otherwise. What am I to do?”

“Save it for my service by doing the homage,” answered

John. “I know you are too loyal to withdraw your heart's

homage from me, come what may, and that the more you

possess to serve me with, the better will be your service.”"

He seems to have given—though scarcely with equal will-

ingness—a like permission to some of his other vassals who

were in the same plight as the Marshal,” and who may

perhaps have been allowed to accompany the latter partly

for the sake of still further obscuring the main object of

his mission.

The Marshal and the vice-chancellor found the French

king at Compiègne, and communicated to him their errand

from John. Philip seemed disposed to entertain John's

proposals—we are not told what they were—and promised

to give them an answer a week later at Anet.* Meanwhile

he reminded the Marshal that the time of their “covenant.”

was nearly up, adding, “You may find it the worse for you

if you do not at once do me homage.” The Marshal assented

and performed the homage then and there, apparently

regarding it as a mere form necessary for the redemption of

his plighted word, but destined to be rendered void by

the peace which he trusted to conclude between the two

1 Hist, de G. le Mar. ww. 12934-66.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 96.

* As a reason for Anet being chosen by Philip as the place of meeting, John

d'Erlée says:

“Quers'ost out semonse por veir

Por aler Caem aseeir " (vv. 12977-8).

But this is an anachronism : Caen had been surrendered to Philip in May or

June 1204 (see above, p. 102), and we are now in spring 1205.


sovereigns in a few days. By this time, however, Arch-

bishop Hubert had discovered the fact of the secret negotia-

tions, and was extremely wroth that the king should have

“plotted such a plot” without consulting him. He there-

fore sent a certain Ralf of Ardenne to tell the count of

Boulogne that the two English envoys had no power to

conclude a treaty. Boulogne at once communicated this

information to Philip, and when the meeting at Anet took

place, the taunt was flung in the Marshal's face, and the

negotiations were broken off. Ralf of Ardenne had already

hurried back to England and told John that the Marshal

had done homage and fealty to the French king and made

alliance with the latter against his own sovereign. When

the unlucky envoys came home, they met with a sorry

greeting. John at once charged the Marshal with having,

“against him and for his damage,” sworn allegiance to his

enemy of France. The Marshal denied the charge, and

asserted that he had done only what John had given him

leave to do. On this John, in his rage, practically denied

his own words, and declared that “his barons and his men"

should judge between him and the Marshal—a judgement

which William retorted that he was quite ready to face."

The fleet and the host were finally summoned to

assemble at Portsmouth at Whitsuntide.” The land forces

had probably received some increase by means of an order

issued by the king on April 15 that, “for the good of

his mother's soul,” all prisoners, except those charged with

treason, should be set at liberty.” No doubt every prisoner

capable of bearing arms was, as he issued from confinement,

made to take the oath of allegiance and enrolled for

military service under the constable of his district. On the

Tuesday in Whitsun week (May 31) John arrived at

Porchester; there he stayed ten days, on the last five of

which he made daily excursions to Portsmouth,” probably

to watch the gathering of the fleet in its harbour.

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 12967-13087. See the Marshal's charter to

Philip in Cal. Doc. France, vol. i. p. 475.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 182.

* Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 54.

* Itin. a. 7.

1205


1205

It is doubtful how far the troops were aware of the

king's real purpose in calling them together. The whole

country was in a state of excitement, hourly expecting an

invasion. It was reported that the duke of Louvain, in

return for the French king's good offices in recovering for

him from the count of Boulogne the share of the revenues

of the latter county to which he was entitled in right of

his wife, had done homage to Philip, and that the duke and

the count had sworn in Philip's presence to be ready, each

at the other's call, to proceed to England with all their

forces and reclaim from John at the sword's point the

English lands of which their wives—the grand-daughters of

King Stephen and Maud of Boulogne—had been dis-

inherited by Henry II. ; whereupon Philip had sworn that

he himself would follow them with his host within a month

after their landing in England." John, in calling his people

to arms, seems to have purposely expressed the object of

the armament in general terms—“for the defence of the

realm"—“for the king's service”*; terms which did not

necessarily imply that he wanted his men to do anything

more than stand on the defensive, ready to meet the

expected invasion. He probably suspected that had he at

the outset demanded more than this, he would have met

with a flat refusal in certain quarters; and the issue proved

the suspicion to be correct. The rank and file of the host,

indeed, were ready and willing not only for defence but for

defiance, eager to carry the war into the enemy's country

before the enemy could set foot in their own. To them

John, at this stage of his career, was still the “king of the

English,” who had lost his continental possessions through

the wiles of his foreign enemies and the disloyalty of his

“French" subjects, and whom they, his faithful English-

men, would gladly help to win those possessions back

again. The heads of the baronage, however, and some at

least of the innermost circle of the royal councillors, were of

another mind. Those of the greater barons who had

deserted or betrayed him in Normandy probably saw, or

* R. Coggeshall, p. 148.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. 96, 97 ; Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 55.


thought they saw, the possibility of serving two masters,

one for their continental lands and the other for their

English lands, and of profiting by this division of service to

make themselves practically independent of both masters

alike. This, indeed, was not a motive which could sway

such a noble soul as William the Marshal ; nor could it

influence Hubert Walter, to whom the continuance or the

severance of the connexion between England and the rest

of the Angevin dominions made, either as an individual or

as archbishop, no difference at all. Yet when the critical

moment came, these two men, who a few weeks before had

been in political as well as personal opposition to each

other, forgot their rivalry and united all their influence to

defeat the king's project of an expedition over sea.

On one of those days of waiting at Porchester, while the

host was gradually assembling, John, seated on the shore,

with his court around him, called the Marshal to his

presence and renewed his demand for “judgement” on the

question of William's alleged treason. William quietly

repeated his former answer, that he had only acted upon

the king's own orders. “I deny it,” again said John.

“You will gain nothing in the end; but I will bide my

time; and meanwhile I will have you come with me to

Poitou and fight for the recovery of my heritage against the

king of France, to whom you have done homage.” The

Marshal remonstrated ; he could not fight against a man

to whom he had done homage. On this John declared his

treason to be manifest, and appealed to the judgement of the

barons present. William faced them boldly, pointed to his

own forehead, and said: “Sirs, look at me, for, by my faith !

I am this day an example for you all. You hear what the

king says; and what he proposes to do to me, that, and

more also, will he do to every one of you, if he can get the

upper hand.” The enraged king at these words called for

instant judgement upon the speaker; but the barons “looked

at each other and drew back.” “By God's teeth !” swore

John, “I see plainly that not one of my barons is with me

in this ; I must take counsel with my bachelors about this

matter which is beginning to look so ugly.”; and he with-

1205




drew to another place. The barons seemingly followed

him, as did the “bachelors,” and the Marshal was left alone,

save for two personal followers of his own. The bachelors

as a body, when John appealed to them, gave it as their

opinion that there could be no essoign for failing to serve

the king on such an occasion as the present; but one of

them, named Baldwin, added that there was in the whole

assembly no man worthy to judge such a good knight as

the Marshal, nor bold enough to undertake the proof (by

ordeal of battle) of the charge brought against him by the

king; and Baldwin's remark “was pleasing to many.”

Finding that neither baron nor knight would challenge the

Marshal for him, John ended the scene by going to dinner;

and after some further ineffectual endeavours to obtain a

champion he let the matter drop, and began once more to

treat the Marshal with civility, if not cordiality."

By June 9 the tale of men and ships was complete.

It was a splendid array; never before, folk said, had there

come together a greater host of brave fighting men, “all

ready and willing to go with the king over sea,” nor had

there ever been assembled in any English harbour so large

a number of ships equipped for the crossing.” To each of

the leaders of the host was assigned, by the king's orders,

a vessel or a number of vessels sufficient for the transport of

his following. Each vessel had received her lading of arms

and provisions, and only the troops remained to be em-

barked, when the archbishop of Canterbury and the Earl

Marshal went to the king and “used every possible argu-

ment to dissuade him from crossing. They represented

what great mischief might arise from his going over sea;-

how perilous it would be for him to thrust himself among so

many battalions of enemies, when he had no safe place of

refuge in the transmarine lands;–how the French king,

being now master of nearly all his territories, could bring

against him a force far outnumbering the English host;-

1205

1 Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 13103-27o.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 154. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 98, says that the ships were

said to number nearly fifteen hundred, and R. Coggeshall, p. 153, that the

shipmen were said to be fourteen thousand.


how great was the danger of putting himself into the hands 1205

of the false and fickle Poitevins, whose wont was to be

always plotting some treachery against their lords;-how

the count of Boulogne and his confederates would speedily

invade England if they heard that its chief men and its

brave army were away;-and how it was much to be feared

that, while endeavouring to regain his lost dominions, he

might lose those which remained to him, especially as he

had no heir whom he could leave behind him to take up the

reins of government in case any misfortune should befall his

own person in the lands beyond the sea. And when he

could not be moved by these and other like arguments, they

(the archbishop and the Marshal) fell down before him and

clasped his knees to restrain him from leaving them, de-

claring that of a surety, if he would not yield to their

prayers, they would detain him by force, lest by his de-

parture the whole kingdom should be brought to confusion.”

Such opposition as this, from two such men, implied a great

deal more than is expressed in their words as reported by

Ralph of Coggeshall. John saw at once that his six months

of elaborate preparation had been wasted, and that his

hopes were ruined. “Weeping and crying" with shame

and grief, he passionately demanded what, then, did the

archbishop advise as best to be done for the realm and for

the king's honour, as well as for the supporters who were

looking for him to join them beyond the sea P After some

consultation, his counsellors agreed that a force of picked

knights should be sent, under the command of some English

noble, to the help of John's continental friends. All the

rest of the host were bidden to return to their homes.

Bitter was the disappointment and vehement the in-

dignation of the troops, especially the sailors, and loud and

deep were the curses which they hurled at the ministers

whose “detestable counsel ” had thwarted the aspirations

and shattered the hopes of king and people alike." The

ministers hurried the unwilling king away to Winchester

(June 1 1); but next day he made his way back to Ports-

mouth, went on board a ship with a few comrades, and

* R. Coggeshall, pp. 152, 153.


crossed into the Isle of Wight, probably hoping that when

he was found to have actually set forth, the sailors and the

troops would compel the barons to follow, or intending to

throw himself alone, if need were, upon the honour of his

Aquitanian adherents. At the end of two days, however,

his companions persuaded him to abandon this desperate

venture, and on June 15 he landed at Studland near

Wareham.” His first act on landing was to claim “an

infinite sum of money” from the earls, barons, prelates and

knights, on the ground that they “had refused to follow him

over sea for the recovery of his lost heritage.”” In so far as

this exaction fell upon the shire-levies and the country

knights, it was unjust, for the majority of these were clearly

in sympathy with the king, and as eager for the expedition

as he was himself. But it was impossible for him, in the

actual circumstances, to distinguish between the willing and

the unwilling ; and there can be little doubt that so far as

the barons were concerned, his assertion was practically

correct. The gathering of the mightiest armament that had

ever been seen in England had ended, not in a vigorous

effort to regain the lost dominions of England's sovereign,

but in the despatch of a handful of knights under the earl

of Salisbury to reinforce the garrison of La Rochelle.”

That it had so ended was directly owing to the action of the

primate and the Marshal. But it would obviously have been

impossible for two men, however influential, to prevail

against the king, if his policy had been supported by the

whole body of the baronage, on the spot and in arms. The

most probable explanation of the matter is that Hubert and

William knew the majority of the barons to be, at best, half-

hearted in the cause. Whether, in a military and political

point of view, the moment was really favourable or unfavour-

able for the undertaking which John contemplated and from

which they shrank, is a question on which speculation is

useless. All we can say is that if an opportunity was thrown

away, the responsibility for its rejection does not lie upon John.

1205

1. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 154; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 98 ; and R. Wendover,

vol. iii. p. 182, with Itin. a. 7. * R. Wendover, l.c.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 154.




John's own feeling about the scene at Portsmouth came

out, brutally indeed, but very naturally, in the exclamation

with which he received the tidings of Archbishop Hubert's

death on July 13: “Now for the first time I am King of

England l’” He took up afresh the plan which Hubert had

foiled. 