He gave

them a joyous welcome, and hearing that a sudden rising

had taken place in Devon, despatched them under the

command of the earl of Salisbury to deal with it. The

insurgents were reported to be besieging Exeter, whence

the earl was bidden to dislodge them ; but they had, in fact,

already taken it; and when Earl William reached Sher-

borne, he was told that they were lying hidden in a wood

through which his road lay, in such numbers that he and

his followers had no chance of escape if they fell into the

ambush; whereupon he went back to the king at Win-

chester.” “You are not good at taking fortresses 1" said

John scornfully when he heard the tale. A few days later

* * R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 3oo, 301.

* /tin. a. 16, May 10-17.

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 147, 148. John was at Fremantle May 17-19; thence

he went to Silchester, May 19 ; Winchester, 19, 20; Odiham, 21, 22; Windsor,

22, 23; Winchester again, 23; ſtin. a. 16.


he again bade the same party go and drive the “Northerners”

out of Exeter. Again they were met at Sherborne by

alarming accounts of the increased numbers of the enemy;

but this time the Flemings, stung by the king's taunt,

insisted upon going forward to “conquer or die”; and the

“Northerners,” though they are said by the contemporary

Flemish chronicler to have been ten to one, evacuated

Exeter at the mere tidings of their approach."

This second expedition to Exeter probably started from

Winchester on the same day (May 24) on which John

issued a notice that any persons who came to his service

from over sea were to place themselves under the orders of

his chamberlain, Hubert de Burgh.” He had summoned a

part of his forces to muster on May 26 at Marlborough ;

but on the 25th they were bidden to proceed to “the parts

of Odiham and Farnham,” there to receive his commands;

while others, who were to have come to Reading, were to

await his orders sent through Jordan de Sackville. On the

same day John wrote to the archbishop of Canterbury,

urgently, but very courteously, entreating that he would

temporarily waive his right to the custody of Rochester

castle and allow the king to garrison it with men of his

own.” To this request Langton acceded.” By this time he

had negotiated another truce, and two days later John gave

him a safe-conduct for himself and for whatever persons he

might bring with him to Staines “to treat of peace between

ourself and our barons.” "

The object of all these changes of front on the king's

part was to gain time for assembling new forces and

devising a new policy. On the same day on which he gave

the safe-conduct to the archbishop, he despatched an urgent

appeal to all “his knights, men-at-arms, and friends who were

coming to join him " from over sea, entreating them to come

as speedily as possible, and promising that they should be

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 148, 149.

* Rot. Pat. p. 138.

* Ib. p. 138 b.

* Rochester castle was restored to the archbishop after the “peace” in June.

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 319.

* Rot. Pat. p. 142.

1215

May 27




1215

well rewarded for so doing." On May 29 he again wrote

to the Pope, complaining of the rebellious attitude of the

barons, which made it impossible for him to fulfil his vow of

crusade.” On Whitsun Eve, June 6, he bade his favourite

captain of mercenaries, Falkes de Bréauté, send four

hundred Welshmen to Salisbury to meet its earl by the

following Tuesday,” seemingly to be ready for action on

the Thursday, when the truce would expire.

John knew, however, that the game was lost. Four

bodies of insurgents were now in the field, and none of

them seem to have paid any regard to the truce. The

townsfolk of Northampton had risen against the royal

garrison of the castle and slain several of them. The force

which occupied London was besieging the Tower; and now,

in this Whitsun week, another body seized Lincoln.” The

king was almost deserted ; at one moment he is said to

have had only seven knights left in his suite ; the sessions

of the Exchequer and of the sheriffs' courts throughout the

country had ceased, because no one would pay him any-

thing or obey him in any matter." He had come up on

May 31 from Odiham to Windsor, doubtless to meet the

archbishop at Staines; on June 4 he went back into Hamp-

shire." On Whit-Monday, June 8, he issued from Merton

a safe-conduct for envoys from the barons to proceed to and

from Staines from Tuesday the 9th till Thursday the 11th.

On Wednesday the Ioth he returned to Windsor, and the

truce was prolonged from Thursday to the following Mon-

day, the 15th." Finally, he despatched William the Marshal

and some other trusty envoys to tell the barons in London

“that for the sake of peace and for the welfare and honour

of his realm, he would freely concede to them the laws and

* Rot. Pat. p. 141 b.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 129.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 214.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 220, 221. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 171.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 301.

* /tin. a. 17. The authentic details of John's movements at this time are of

some importance in view of Ralph of Coggeshall's assertion (p. 172) that he was

just then so overcome with terror “ut jam extra Windleshoram nusquam progredi

auderet.”

* Aot. Pat. pp. 142 b, 143.


liberties which they asked ; and that they might appoint a

place and day for him and them to meet, for the settlement

of all these things.” The messengers “guilelessly performed

the errand which had been guilefully imposed on them";

and the barons, “buoyed up with immense joy,” fixed the

meeting to take place on June 15 in a meadow between

Staines and Windsor, called Runnimead.”

There, on the appointed morning, the two parties

pitched their tents at a little distance from each other on

the long reach of level grass-land which stretched along the

river-bank. The barons came “with a multitude of most

illustrious knights, all thoroughly well armed.”* “It is

useless,” says another chronicler, “to enumerate those who

were present on the side of the barons, for they comprised

well-nigh all the nobility of England.” With the king

were the archbishops of Canterbury and Dublin, seven

bishops, Pandulf—who had been sent back to England as

the Pope's representative instead of Nicolas—the Master of

the English Templars, the earls of Pembroke, Salisbury,

Warren and Arundel, and about a dozen barons of lesser

degree, including Hubert de Burgh.* It was to these

chosen few, and above all to the first of them, that John

really capitulated. His declaration that he granted the

Great Charter by their counsel may well have been true of

them all ; his most devoted adherents could, if they had any

political sagacity, advise him nothing else for his own

interest. The terms of capitulation, however, imply more

than this. Nominally, the treaty—for it was nothing less"

—was based upon a set of forty-nine articles “which the

barons demanded and the lord king granted.” But those

articles are obviously not the composition of “the barons”

mustered under Robert Fitz-Walter. Every step of the pro-

ceedings of these insurgents up to that moment, every step

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 301.

: “In prato qui vocatur Runemad,” R. Coggeshall, p. 172.

Jö.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 302.

* Stubbs, Const. Hist, vol. i. p. 530.

* Heading of Articles of the Barons: “Ista sunt capitula quae Barones petunt

et Dominus Rex concedit.”

I215

June 15


of their proceedings afterwards, as well as everything that is

known of the character of their leaders, goes to show that

they were no more capable of rising to the lofty conception

embodied in the Charter—the conception of a contract

between king and people which should secure equal rights

to every class and every individual in the nation—than

they were capable of formulating it in the minute detail and

the carefully chosen phraseology of the Charter or even of

the Articles. The true history of the treaty of Runnimead

is told in one brief sentence by Ralph of Coggeshall: “By

the intervention of the archbishop of Canterbury, with

several of his fellow-bishops and some barons, a sort of

peace was made.” In other words, the terms were drawn

up by Stephen Langton with the concurrence of the other

bishops who were at hand, and of the few lay barons, on

either side, who were statesmen enough to look at the crisis

from a higher standpoint than that of personal interest;

they were adopted—for the moment—by the mass of the

insurgents as being a weapon, far more effective than any

that they could have forged for themselves, for bringing the

struggle with the king (so at least they hoped) to an easy

and a speedy end ; and they were accepted—also for the

moment—by John, as his readiest and surest way of escape

from a position of extreme difficulty and peril. Thus

before nightfall the Great Charter was sealed; and in return

John received anew the homage of the barons who had

defied him.”

It was, however, one thing to make the treaty, and

quite another to carry it into effect. The framers of the

Articles and of the Charter had done what they could

towards that end by a carefully planned “form of security

for the observance of the peace and liberties between the

king and the kingdom.”* Out of the whole baronage of

England the barons present at Runnimead were to choose

twenty-five, who should “observe, keep, and cause to be

1215

* R. Coggeshall, p. 172. Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 96.

* Rot. Pat. p. 143. The “die Veneris” which occurs three times in this

writ is in each case an unquestionable, though unaccountable, error for “die

Lunae.” * Art. Bar. c. 49.


observed, with all their might,” the provisions of the

Charter. If the king failed to do his part, these twenty-

five were to compel him thereto by force if necessary. For

this purpose they were authorized to claim assistance from

“the community of the whole country,” and they were

therefore to receive an oath of obedience from every man in

the realm." King and barons alike swore that they would

keep all the provisions of the Charter “in good faith and

without deceit.”* The king was made to promise that he

would not procure “from any one” anything whereby his

concessions might be revoked or diminished, and that if

such revocation should be obtained it should be accounted

void and never used.* That John's promises were worthless

every one knew ; it was not likely that all the pressure

which could be brought to bear upon him by “five-and-

twenty over-kings”—as his foreign mercenaries sarcastically

called the elected barons 4–would more than suffice, if even

it should suffice, to compel him to keep his word. Still the

check thus set over him was a very strong one. It was

in fact the strongest that could be devised ; and it was

made of indisputable authority by its incorporation in the

Charter.”

On the other hand, the Charter contained no provision

for compelling the barons in general to fulfil their part of

its obligations, either towards their sub-tenants" or towards

the Crown, except what might be implied in the authority

given to the twenty-five; while for securing the loyalty and

good faith of the twenty-five themselves it contained no

provision at all. If we look at the text of the Charter

alone, we can but endorse the verdict of its foreign soldier-

critics: England was exchanging one king for five-and-

twenty. This defect in the treaty seems to have been

noticed as soon as it was passed, and a remedy was sought

in the appointment of another body of barons, thirty-eight

* Art. Bar. c. 49; Magna Charta, c. 61.

* M. Charta, c. 63. 8 Ib. c. 61.

* M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 611, “Ecce vigesimus quintus” [it

should have been “sextus”] “rex in Anglia; ecce jam non rex, nec etiam

regulus, sed regum opprobrium,” etc.

* M. Charta, c. 61. ° Ib. cc. 15, 16, 60.

I215




in number, chosen from both parties," and including the Earl

Marshal and the other chief adherents of the king ; these,

after swearing obedience to the twenty-five, took another oath

which bound them to compel both the king and the twenty-

five to deal justly with one another.” This precaution may

perhaps have been suggested by Langton and the other

bishops when a significant incident had shown them that

the promise of the insurgent barons was worth no more

than that of the king. This incident rests upon the

authority of a joint statement purporting to be issued, evi-

dently by way of protest and warning and for the clearing

of their own consciences, by ten eye-witnesses—the arch-

bishops of Canterbury and Dublin, seven English bishops,

and Pandulf. In a letter-patent addressed to “all Christian

people,” these ten persons (if the document be genuine)

recite how in their sight and hearing the barons had made

to the king—seemingly before the Charter was sealed—a

verbal promise that they would give him, for their observ-

ance of the agreement between him and themselves, any

security which he might choose, except castles or hostages.

“Afterwards” John called upon them to fulfil this promise

by giving him in their turn a charter, whereby they should

acknowledge themselves bound to him by oath and homage

as his liegemen, and for the preservation of his rights and

those of his heirs and the defence of his realm. “But,” say

the witnesses, “this they would not do.”* Such, it seems,

was the earnest of the loyalty to their plighted word which

England, as well as John, had to expect from the men who

posed as the champions of justice and right.

For ten days the nominally reconciled enemies sat

watching each other, the king at Windsor, the barons still

1215

1 The twenty-five were of course all “Northerners” in the political sense;

see the list in M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 604.

* The list of these thirty-eight is headed “Obsecutores et Observatores,”

and ends thus: “Isti omnes juraverunt quod obsequerentur mandato viginti

quinque baronum.” Another MS. adds: “Omnes isti juraverunt cogere si

opus esset ipsos xxv barones ut rectificarent regem. Et etiam cogere ipsum si

mutato animo forte recalcitraret,” M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. pp. 605, 606.

Considering the whole context, I think there can be little doubt that “rectificare

regem’’—though an odd way of expressing it—really means here “to do right to

the king.” * Rot. Pat. p. 181.


encamped in the surrounding meadows. In private, John's

feelings broke out in wild paroxysms of fury characteristic

of his race; he “gnashed his teeth, rolled his eyes, caught

up sticks and straws and gnawed them like a madman, or

tore them into shreds with his fingers.”” But to the

outside world he wore a calm and smiling face, chatting

familiarly and gaily with every one whom he met, and

declaring himself perfectly satisfied with the settlement of

affairs.” Within the next seven days he despatched copies June 19-22

of the Charter to the sheriffs, foresters and other royal

bailiffs in every shire, with letters patent ordering them to

make the men under their jurisdiction swear obedience to the

twenty-five barons in whatever form these latter might

prescribe, and cause twelve sworn knights to be elected in

the next county court for the purpose of inquiring into evil

customs with a view to their extirpation as promised in the

Charter.” He also sent to his mercenary captains orders to

desist from hostilities and amend any damage which they

might have done to the barons since the peace was made.”

On the following Tuesday, June 23, he ordered the foreign

soldiers at Dover to be sent home at once.” On the 25th

a number of sheriffs were removed from office and replaced

by new ones." Before that date the king had appointed a

new chief justiciar, Hubert de Burgh," a faithful adherent of

his own, who was also an honourable man, respected by all

parties, and a member of the committee of thirty-eight. On

the 27th the sheriffs and the knights elected in every shire

to inquire into evil customs were ordered to punish summarily

all persons who refused the oath of obedience to the twenty-

five.8

The king was then at Winchester; he had left Windsor

on the night of the 25th.” Illness—seemingly a severe

attack of gout—had made him unable to move sooner, and

the barons had taken advantage of his physical helplessness

to heap upon him every insult in their power. One day the

1 M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 611.

* M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 159.

* Rot. Pat. p. 18o b. * Ib. p. 143 b. * Ib. p. 144.

* 13. pp. 144 b, 145. Zö. p. 144 b.

* Ib. p. 145 b. 9 Itin. a. 17.

1215

June 18

t


twenty-five required his presence to confirm a judgement in

the Curia Regis; he was in bed, unable to set a foot to the

ground, so he sent them word that they must come and

deliver the judgement in his chamber, as he could not go to

them. They “answered that they would not go, for it would

be against their right; but if he could not walk, he must

cause himself to be carried.” He did so, and when he was

brought into their presence “they did not rise to meet him,

for it was their saying that if they had risen, they should

have done contrary to their right.”" This scene probably

occurred in connexion with one of the cases dealt with in

the fifty-second article of the Charter, the cases of persons

who were, or asserted that they were, deprived of their lands,

castles, privileges or rights by an arbitrary act of John or

of his predecessors, without judgement of their peers. Some

of these cases, in which there was no doubt about the cir-

cumstances of the deprivation, were settled without delay,

and immediate restitution was made to the claimants by the

Crown.” But there were others which required investigation.

Such was the claim of the earl of Essex to the custody of

the Tower of London.” The chief justiciar of England had

been recognized as entitled by virtue of his office to the

custody of the Tower ever since the accession of Henry II. ;

but Henry's mother, the Empress Maud, had granted it by

charter to Geoffrey de Mandeville and his heirs;* and it

was now claimed as an hereditary right by the earl of Essex,

as eldest son of the late justiciar Geoffrey Fitz-Peter by his

marriage with Beatrice de Say, on whom the representation

of the Mandeville family had devolved.” This matter was

too delicate and too important to be decided in haste ;

pending its decision, the Tower was temporarily placed in

1215

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 151.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 221 ; Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 215-18.

* W. Coventry, l.c.

* Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, pp. 89, 166.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 225, sums up the earl’s position and character

very suggestively: “In parte adversa erat Gaufridus de Maundevilla comes

Essexae, quem rex cingulo militari donaverat, quique regi in xix millibus

marcarum obligatus erat pro comitissa Gloucestriae quondam uxore sua, quam iste

nuper acceperat.” See above, p. 196. Geoffrey's first wife had been a daughter

of Robert Fitz-Walter; see Note I at end.


neutral hands, the hands of the archbishop of Canterbury,"

to whom Rochester castle was at the same time restored.”

Finally, John proposed that the other questions in dispute

between himself and individual barons should all be deter-

mined at Westminster on July 16. This being agreed,

the barons withdrew to London” and the king to Winchester,

whence at the beginning of July he proceeded into Wilt-

shire.*

King and barons alike knew that the “peace” had been

made only to be broken. The barons were the first to

break it. Some of those “Northerners” from beyond the

Humber by whom the strife had been originally begun had

actually left Runnimead in the middle of the conference, and

were now openly preparing for war, on the pretext that they

“had not been present” at the settlement.” Their southern

allies were really doing the same ; only they veiled their

preparations under the guise of a tournament to be held,

ostensibly in celebration of the peace, at Stamford on

July 6. Robert Fitz-Walter and his companions, however,

quickly discovered that if they wished to keep their hold

upon London they must not venture far away from the city;

they therefore postponed the tournament for a week, and

transferred it from Stamford to Staines. The victor's prize

was to be “a bear, which a lady was going to send.”" Mean-

while the new sheriffs—appointed since the peace, and

specially charged to enforce its provisions—were meeting

with a very rough reception in every shire where the

“Northern" influence predominated. All over the country

the barons were fortifying their castles; some were even

building new ones.” A more scrupulous king than John

might well have deemed himself justified, under such cir-

cumstances, in doing what John did—following their example

in preparing to fling the treaty to the winds and renew

the war.

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 221 ; Ann. Dunst. a. 1215. Cf. R. Wendover,

vol. iii. p. 319. * R. Wendover, l.c.

* Ib. ; R. Coggeshall, p. 172.

* Itin. a. 17. * W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 222.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 321, 322.

7 W. Coventry, l.c.

I215


1215

The meeting which had been appointed for July 15 was

postponed till the 16th, and the place for it changed from

Westminster to Oxford. On the 15th the king came up

from Clarendon into Berkshire, and on his way from

Newbury to Abingdon despatched a letter to the barons

stating that he “could not” meet them in person at Oxford

on the morrow, but that the archbishop of Dublin, the bishop

of Winchester, Pandulf, the earls Marshal, Warren, and

Arundel, and the justiciar, would be there in his stead, “to

do to you what we ought to do to you, and to receive from

you what you ought to do to us.” The archbishop of

Dublin was no longer justiciar in Ireland; Geoffrey Marsh

had been, on July 6, appointed to succeed him in that office.”

On the same day Walter de Lacy had been reinstated in all

his Irish lands.” Throughout the summer of this year John,

busy as he was with English affairs, had found time to pay

even more attention than usual to those of his Irish dominion.

From May to July the Close and Charter Rolls are full of

letters and writs relating to the Irish March; charters to

towns, to religious houses, to individual barons, orders con-

cerning military arrangements and other matters of local

administration," all show such constant intervention and such

personal interest on the king's part as to convey an im-

pression that he was specially endeavouring to win for himself

the support of the nobles, clergy and people of the Irish

March as a counterpoise to the hostility and disaffection

which surrounded him in his English realm. It was, how-

ever, to the Continent that he mainly looked for aid. “After

much reflection,” says Roger of Wendover, “he chose, like

the Apostle Peter, to seek vengeance upon his enemies by

means of two swords, that is, by a spiritual sword and a

material one, so that if he could not triumph by the one, he

might safely count upon doing so by the other.””

The spiritual weapon was the first to be actually drawn ;

but even before its first stroke fell, swords of the other kind

1 Rot. Pat. p. 149. * Ib. p. 148.

* Ib. p. 148 b.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 218, 218b, 219, 219 b ; Rot. Chart. pp. 210-13.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 319.


were making ready for the king's service. Emissaries from 1215

him were soon busy in “all the neighbouring lands beyond

the sea,” gathering troops by promises of rich pay and ample

endowments in English land, to be confirmed by charters if

the recipients desired it." The chancellor, Richard Marsh,

was thus raising troops in Aquitaine;” Hugh de Boves was August

doing the like in Flanders. Those whom they enlisted were

to be ready to come to the king at Dover by Michaelmas

Day.” John was also seeking allies in France. On August

12 he wrote to Count Peter of Britanny, offering him a grant

of the honour of Richmond if he would come “with all speed,

and with all the knights he could bring,” ready for service

against the insurgents in England.” He is even said to have

tried hard, “by enormous promises,” to gain help from Philip

Augustus; but in this quarter “others had been beforehand

with him,” says the chronicler significantly.” It was not

without a cause that the barons at Runnimead had refused

to write themselves John's liegemen.

Within the realm, the royal castles were being re-

victualled and made ready to stand a siege at any moment.”

As yet no further attempt had been made upon any of them ;

but in the north the barons, or their followers and partizans,

had begun to lay waste the royal manors and overrun the

forests, cutting down and selling the timber, and killing the

deer. Again the archbishop and bishops came forward as

peacemakers, and it was arranged that the king should meet

them on August 16 at Oxford, while the barons should

assemble at Brackley, there to await the result of the church-

men's mediation. When the day arrived, however, the king

was still in Wiltshire, and excused his absence on the ground

that he had been so ill-treated since the conclusion of the

peace, and moreover at the last conference the barons had

come together in such menacing array, that he deemed it

neither safe nor prudent to risk himself in their midst; an

excuse which was practically justified by the action of the

1. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 320 ; where, however, the list of emissaries is

obviously incorrect. * Rot. Pat. p. 153, 153 b.

3 R. Wendover, l.c. * Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 152 b.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 222. * R. Wendover, l.c.

R


º

1215

Aug.

16-18

º

barons themselves, who, instead of waiting at Brackley as

they had agreed to do, came “with a numerous following ”

to meet the bishops at Oxford."

The bishops had now received from Rome a communica-

tion which made their position, or at least that of the Primate,

an exceedingly anxious and painful one. In consequence,

it seems, of John's letter of May 29 Innocent had issued a

commission to the bishop of Winchester, the abbot of Reading

and Pandulf, whereby he declared excommunicate all “ dis-

turbers of the king and kingdom of England, with their

accomplices and abettors,” laid their lands under interdict,

and ordered the archbishop and his episcopal brethren, on

pain of suspension from their office, to cause this excom-

munication to be published throughout the realm every

Sunday and holiday till the offenders should have made

satisfaction to the king and returned to their obedience.”

Ill-fitted as the barons had proved to be for the great work

in which Langton had sought to enlist them, the cause of

England's freedom was yet too closely bound up with theirs

for him to be willing to launch at them such a sentence as

this, and he had sympathized too keenly with his country's

misery under a former interdict not to recoil from the

prospect of another. The barons, on the other hand, had

been heedless of interdict and excommunication so long as

their material interests coincided with those of the king

against the Church; but the matter would wear a different

aspect in their eyes now that the situation was reversed and

their one hope was in the aid of the Church against the king.

The Pope's mandate was shown to them and the bishops

in conference at Oxford; after three days' deliberation the

bishops agreed to delay the publication of the sentence till they

had seen the king again and made one more effort to bring

him to a colloquy in London or at Staines. It was rumoured

that he had gone to the coast with the intention of quitting

England altogether; and the bishops are said to have

followed him to Portsmouth, and there found that he was

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 222.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 336-8; misplaced, as may be seen by comparing

W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 223.


actually on shipboard. He came ashore again, however,

to speak with them; but he absolutely refused to hold any

more personal conferences with the barons. The bishops

returned to meet the barons at Staines on August 26,

accompanied by envoys from the king, who were charged

with a protest, to be delivered in his name in the hearing of

the whole assembly, that “it was not his fault if the peace

was not carried out according to the agreement.” After long

deliberation the papal sentence was proclaimed, but with a

tacit understanding that it was to be, for the present at least,

a dead letter, on the ground that as no names were mentioned

in it, the phrase “disturbers of the king and kingdom " need

not be applied to any person or group of persons in particular,

but might be interpreted by every man as he pleased. The

more violent partizans immediately applied it to the king

himself, since in their eyes he was the chief troubler of the

land, and therefore also his own worst enemy."

After placing his queen and his eldest son in safety in

Corfe castle,” John had taken ship, seemingly about August

24, at Southampton or Portsmouth, and sailed round the

coast to Sandwich, where he appears to have landed on

the 28th.” The barons in London, if we may believe the

report of the chroniclers, were foolish enough to imagine

that he would never land again at all.” They were now

taking upon themselves, in all those counties where their

power was strong enough, to supersede both the sheriffs and

the justices and usurp their functions, parcelling out the

country among members of their own body, each of whom

was to act as the chief judicial and administrative authority

in the district committed to him.” In their premature

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 224. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 341.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 152.

* John's Itinerary, a. 17, is blank from August 22, when he was at Wareham,

to August 28, when he appears at Sandwich. The Hist, des Ducs, p. 153,

accounts for this blank by stating that he went by sea from Southampton to Dover

(whither he did proceed on August 31 or September 1 ; Itin. l.c.). W. Coventry

(vol. ii. p. 224) says the bishops who left Oxford on August 19 to seek him

found him just embarked at Portsmouth, which comes to the same thing.

* The absurdity of the reports given in R. Wendover (vol. iii. pp. 320, 321)

and M. Paris (Hist. Angl. vol. ii. pp. 160, 161) about John's movements at this

time was pointed out long ago by Dr. Lingard, Hist. England, vol. ii. p. 362.

5 Earl Geoffrey de Mandeville took Essex; Robert Fitz-Walter, Northampton-

1215

Aug.

23-24?

…


1215

triumph they were even beginning to talk of choosing a new

sovereign, and of calling the whole baronage of England

to a council for that purpose, “since this ought to be done

by the common consent of the whole realm.”* Early in

September, however, the revolutionists awoke from their

dreams to find that the king was safe in Dover castle,

surrounded by a little band of foreign soldiers who had

already joined him there, and awaiting the coming of the

host which was gathering for him beyond the sea.” The

three executors of the papal mandate were meanwhile

insisting that now, at any rate, the barons had unquestion-

ably fallen under its terms, by endeavouring to expel the

king from his realm; and they excommunicated by names,

several of the revolutionary leaders, together with the citizens

of London, whom they placed under interdict. These

sentences, however, were disregarded, on the plea that they

were barred by a previous appeal to the general council 8

which was to be held at Rome on All Saints' Day, and

which most of the English bishops were preparing to attend.

Archbishop Stephen was about to set forth, in the middle of

September, when two of the papal commissioners—Pandulf

and Bishop Peter of Winchester—went to him in person

and insisted that he should enforce the publication of the

Pope's sentence throughout his own diocese on all the

appointed days, and order his suffragans to do the same.

Stephen answered that he would take no further steps in the

matter till he had spoken of it with the Pope himself, since

he believed the sentence to be grounded on a misunder-

standing of the facts of the case. On this Pandulf and Peter

denounced him as disobedient to the Pope's mandate, and,

in accordance with its terms, suspended him from his office.*

Stephen accepted his suspension without protest. He

was indeed so grievously disappointed at the turn which

shire; Roger de Cresci, Norfolk and Suffolk; the earl of Winchester, Cambridge-

shire and Huntingdonshire; William of Aubigny, Lincolnshire; John de Lacy,

Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire; Robert de Ros, Northumberland. W.

Coventry, vol. ii. p. 224. 1 Ib.

* Ib. Cf. Hist, des Ducs, p. 153.

3 W. Coventry, l.c.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 340. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 174, and W. Coventry,

vol. ii. p. 225.


.

affairs in England had taken, and so hopeless of doing any

further good there, that he had almost determined not only

to resign his see, but to retire altogether from the world and

bury himself in a hermitage or a Carthusian cell." Several

of the bishops visited the king before they went over sea;”

we are not told whether Stephen did so; but he certainly

had the king's permission for his journey to Rome, for on

September Io John by letters patent took under his pro-

tection all the archbishop's men, goods, lands and other

possessions, and forbade his own men to do them any

injury.” On the 13th the king wrote again to the Pope,

asking for his counsel and aid, and complaining that

whereas before we subjected our land to you as overlord,

our barons were obedient to us, now they have risen up

violently against us, specially on account, as they publicly

declare, of that very thing.” This letter was carried by the

archbishops of Bordeaux and Dublin and seven other

envoys.” Pandulf—now bishop-elect of Norwich—seems to

have gone to Rome about the same time, charged with

another letter to the Pope.” But before any of these travellers

had set out on their way the Pope had drawn his sword

again; and this time the sword was a two-handed one. It

was the sword of the temporal overlord of England, as well

as of the spiritual head of Christendom.

The sixty-first article of the Charter enacted, as we have

seen, that if the king should procure “from any one" a

revocation or cassation of that document, such revocation

should be accounted void. The only person, however, from

whom such a thing could possibly be sought was of course

the Pope; and in so far as the Pope was concerned, the

clause was itself in feudal law null and void from the begin-

ning, owing to the action of the barons before the Charter

was drawn up or thought of. Whatever may have been

their real share in the surrender of the kingdom to the Pope

in May 12 I 3, they had at any rate in February 1215,

* Gir. Cambr. vol. i. p. 401.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 224, 225.

* Rot. Pat. p. 154 b. This disposes of R. Coggeshall's assertion (p. 174)

that Stephen went “rege invito et ei minas intentante.”

* Rot. Pat. p. 182. * Ib. p. 182 b (dateless).

^-1215


1215

if we may believe William Mauclerc (and there is no

reason for disbelieving him), put on record their full con-

currence in that transaction after it was accomplished, and

even taken voluntarily upon themselves the whole responsi-

bility both for its accomplishment and for its initiation.'

Thereby they had deprived themselves of whatever legal

pretexts they might otherwise have had for repudiating its

consequences; and foremost of those consequences was the

fact that the Pope was now legally the supreme arbiter of

political affairs in England, by a right which had been given

to him by the joint action of the king and the barons, and

against which no later reservation made between those two

parties themselves (such as the sixty-first article of the

Charter) was of any force in feudal law. The framers of

the Charter seem to have been conscious of this; * John,

indeed, had pointedly reminded them of it before he con-

sented to the Charter, telling the barons, in answer to their

demands, that nothing in the government and constitution

of England ought to be, or lawfully could be, altered without

the knowledge and sanction of the Pope, now that he was

overlord of the realm ; and he had publicly appealed to the

Pope, as overlord, against them and all their doings. As

soon as the Charter was sealed, he had despatched envoys

to Rome to prosecute his appeal, and to lay before Innocent

a statement of his case, together with such extracts from the

Charter as were most likely to influence the Pope in his

favour. The result was that on August 24—two days

before the papal denunciation of the “disturbers of the

realm" was published by the English bishops at Staines—

Innocent as temporal overlord of England quashed the

Charter, and as Pope forbade its observance by either king

or people, on pain of excommunication.”

* See above, pp. 182 and 225.

* In the “Articles of the Barons,” c. 49, this reservation-clause ran : “Rex

faciet eos securos per cartas archiepiscopi et episcoporum et magistri Pandulf

quod nihil impetrabit a domino Papa,” etc. In the Charter, c. 61, “ab aliguo"

was substituted for “a domino Papa,” and the security to be given by letters

patent of Pandulf and the bishops was made to refer to the keeping of the

Charter in general (ib. c. 62), instead of to that one particular point.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 322-7.


-

CHAPTER VII

1215–1216

Dicitur . . . “Sine Terra,” quia moriturus nil terrae in pace possedit.

M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 191.

THE Pope's letters evidently did not reach England till after

the primate and the bishops had set out for Rome, so that

there was no one left to publish the new sentence; and it

seems, in fact, never to have been published in England at

all. But its existence soon became known there ; and when

once the barons knew of it, they knew, too, that they must

make their choice between unconditional surrender and war

to the uttermost with both king and Pope; for there was

no one left to act as their mediator with either. They chose

war; but they were not ready for war, and the king was.

Poitevins, Gascons, Brabantines, Flemings, were flocking to

him from over sea." On October 2 he ordered his brother,

Earl William of Salisbury, to visit ten royal castles and

select from their garrisons troops for service in the field.

On the 4th he committed the superintendence of military

affairs in mid-England and the west to Falkes de Bréauté,

and issued a general safe-conduct to “all who may wish to

return to our fealty and service” through the medium of

Falkes or the earl.” He himself had, towards the end of

September, advanced as far inland as Malling; * but this

seems to have been merely a sort of reconnoitring ex-

pedition ; his plan evidently was to wait till all his expected

1. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 331 ; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 226.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 156 b. * /tin. a. 17.

247

1215


reinforcements had arrived from over sea, and then march

with them upon London, while William and Falkes did the

same with the troops which they could bring up from the

west, so as to place the capital between two fires. While

his forces were concentrating, those of the barons were

scattering; they had no scheme of united action; one party

had renewed the siege of Northampton castle, another was

engaged in that of Oxford." At last the leaders in London

decided that something must be done to bar John's way to

the capital; and they advanced into Kent as far as Ospring.

When they reached it John was at Canterbury; having only

a small escort he, on hearing of his enemies' approach,

hurriedly fell back to Dover; they, however, were so scared

by a report that he had set out from Canterbury to offer

them battle that they beat an equally hasty retreat towards

Rochester.” Their great fear was lest he should gain

possession of Rochester castle, which he had vainly tried

to induce the archbishop to give up to him two months

before.” On October 1 I Reginald of Cornhill, in whose

charge Stephen had left it, suffered it to be occupied by a

band of picked knights under William of Aubigny. But the

triumph of the intruders was shortlived ; two days later the

king was at the gates of Rochester.”

“Certes, sire,” said one of John's Flemish allies as the

royal host set out for Rochester, “you make little account

of your enemies if you go to fight them with so small a

force l’” “I know them too well,” answered John ; “they

are to be nothing accounted of or feared. With fewer men

than we have we might safely fight them. Certes, one

thing I may tell you truly, I grieve not so much for the

evil which the men of my land are doing to me, as that

1215

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 226.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 157. The date seems to be either September 20 to 22

or October 5 to 6; see Itin. a. 17.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 181 b.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 330, 331. The dates are not quite clear.

Roger gives none, but says John laid siege to the castle “on the third day” after

the barons entered it; Ralph of Coggeshall, p. 175, says John entered the city

on Sunday October 11. But the Itinerary shows that John was on the 11th

at Ospring and on the 12th at Gillingham, and he does not date from Rochester

till the 13th. I have therefore ventured to suppose that Ralph has given the

date of the barons’ arrival by mistake for that of the king's.


their wickedness should be seen by strangers.”" The king

knew what the stranger did not know, that so long as he

could keep the Medway between himself and the main

body of the barons he was safe. He therefore began his

operations by an attempt to destroy the bridge, and thus to

cut off the communications between Rochester and London.

It seems that he sent a party up the river in boats to fire

the bridge from beneath, and that they succeeded in so

doing, but that Robert Fitz-Walter, with a picked body of

knights and men-at-arms, was guarding the bridge at the

time and managed to extinguish the flames and drive off

the assailants.” Fitz-Walter, however, appears to have

immediately returned to London; * and in a second attack

on the bridge John was completely successful; the bridge

was destroyed, and the king proceeded to invest the castle *

and assault the town.

On his first approach the citizens had manned their

walls and “made a great show of defending themselves”;

but “when they saw he was preparing to assault them they

broke into a rout, left the battlements, and fled on all sides.

Then his men entered through the gates, and began to chase

them through the town to the bridge so vigorously that they

drove all the knights by force into the castle; of whom "–

sarcastically adds the Flemish soldier of fortune who tells

the tale—“many would gladly have fled to London if they

could.”” But they could not, the bridge being now gone.

The whole party thus gathered in the castle numbered about

ninety-five knights and forty-five men-at-arms." The castle

when given to William of Aubigny and his followers was

destitute of provisions; they had had no time to procure

any, save what little they could get in the town;' and they

saw before them an imminent prospect of starvation. John

pressed the siege vigorously; on the day after its com-

mencement he ordered “all the smiths in Canterbury” to

devote their whole time, “day and night,” to making pick-

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 158, 159. * R. Coggeshall, p. 175.

* See below, p. 250. * * W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 226.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 159.

• Cf. ib. p. 157; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 226; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p.

33o ; and R. Coggeshall, p. 176. 7 R. Wendover, l.c.

I215


1215

axes, which were to be sent to him at Rochester as fast

as they were made." His forces increased daily till they

became “such a multitude that they struck fear and horror

into all who beheld them.”* They ravaged all over Kent,

and wrought havoc in Rochester, stabling their horses in the

cathedral and committing every kind of sacrilege in the

holy places.”

At all this the barons in London looked on in helpless

consternation. They had plighted a solemn oath to William

of Aubigny, when he undertook the expedition to Rochester,

that if the king besieged him there they would succour him

without fail.” A fortnight passed before they made any

movement to redeem their promise; then, on October 26,

some seven hundred knights" set out under the command of

Robert Fitz-Walter; but they got no farther than Dartford.

One chronicler says they “retreated before the breath of a

very soft south wind as if beaten back by swords”;" another,

that they turned back in dismay on hearing how numerous

were the forces of the king ;" a third, that they were misled

on this point by an exaggerated account given them by

a Templar sent to meet them for that purpose by John

himself.” In any case, they returned to London, and having

taken care to provide themselves with ample stores, they sat

down to “play at the fatal dice and drink the best wine,

according to each man's taste, and do it is needless to say

what besides,” till S. Andrew's Day. By that time they

| Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 231 b.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 331. Cf. Hist, des Ducs, p. 160. One party

under Hugh de Boves was wrecked in a storm on the Norfolk coast, September

26; their leader was drowned, so were many others, and a large quantity of

money also went down; but the survivors made their way to the king in time to

join him at Rochester and help in the siege, Hist, des Ducs, pp. 155, 156;

Chron. Mailros, a. 1215; R. Coggeshall, pp. 174, 175; R. Wendover, vol. iii.

p. 332.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 176.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 226; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 333.

* W. Coventry, l.c. * R. Wendover, l.c.

7 W. Coventry, l.c.

* M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 165. It is Matthew alone who gives the

name of the leader of the party. His version of the expedition is important, as

he—notwithstanding his strong anti-royalist feeling—shows up the cowardice of

the barons, and especially of Fitz-Walter, on this occasion, quite as strongly,

and is quite as sarcastic upon it, as the royalist Roger of Wendover.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 333.


expected important reinforcements; and they reckoned that

the besieged could hold out till then."

William of Aubigny and his comrades did hold out, but

at desperate odds. Every possible mode of attack—mining,

battery, assault—was tried in turn upon the fortress. Five

great slinging engines were plied incessantly, day and night,

against its walls. The garrison, already short of food, and

expecting no mercy from the king if they surrendered, were

minded to sell their lives dearly; they fought like heroes;

“nor,” says the Barnwell annalist, “does living memory recall

any siege so urgently carried on and so manfully resisted.””

A strange contrivance at last shattered the mighty keep.

On November 25 John ordered the justiciar to send him

with all possible speed “forty bacon-pigs of the fattest, and

of those which are least good for eating, to be put to set fire

to the stuff that we have got together under the tower.””

Of the results of the blaze thus kindled a token remains to

this day, in the round tower which at the south-west angle

of the keep contrasts so markedly with the square towers at

the other corners, and which replaces the original square

one thus destroyed by John. 