

There can hardly be a reasonable doubt that he made use of

Philip's ambition for a purpose of his own, a purpose which

was really the direct opposite of that which Philip had in

view—the purpose, fiot of crushing England, but of winning

her back to the Roman alliance, and thus securing her as a

counterpoise, in case of need, to the power of Philip himself.”

In a word, Innocent and John had simultaneously recognized

the fact that, in the interest of both alike, the time for their

reconciliation had come.

John, as we have seen, had paved the way by offering, at

the close of 12 12, his acceptance of the terms proposed by

the Pope in 121 1. Innocent's reply to this offer was written

on February 27, 1213. Although, he said, he considered

absence of the justiciar and the Marshal, at such a crisis in the king's fortunes,

appears to have been followed by no disturbance in the country which they thus ,

left without a ruler.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 246.

* See Petit-Dutaillis, Hist. de Louis VIII. pp. 37, 38.


himself no longer bound by his own terms, since the king

had rejected them, yet for the sake of peace he was willing

to abide by the form of agreement thus again proposed, if

before June 1 the king would, by an oath sworn in his

presence by four barons, and by letters patent addressed to

the archbishop of Canterbury and the other exiled bishops,

promise to keep it faithfully and fulfil it effectually, “accord-

ing to the expositions and explanations which we have

thought good to be set forth for the removal of all scruple

and doubt.” \In May, when all England was expecting the

attack of Philip Augustus, three of John's messengers brought

back from Rome this letter, together with a copy of the form

originally committed to Pandulf and Durand, and the

“expositions and explanations” of the arrangements now

required on both sides to insure its execution." All these

documents seem to have been communicated to Pandulf in

a private interview which he had with the Pope on the eve

of his departure from Rome in January;” at any rate he

was well aware of their contents and fully instructed how to

act in consequence. Just as the French fleet was ready to

sail, he in the Pope's name forbade all further proceedings

against England till he should have once more appealed to

John and learned whether he would yet repent.” Close upon

the return of the English envoys from Rome followed two

Templars, who landed at Dover with a message from Pandulf

to the king, requesting an interview. It took place at Dover

on May 13. . In presence of king and legate, the earls of

Salisbury, Warren, and Ferrars and the count of Boulogne

swore in John's behalf the oath of security required by

Innocent; and on the same day John published by letters

patent the agreement concluded between himself and Pan-

dulf in the form which the Pope had prescribed."

* The Pope's letter, the “Forma,” and the “Expositiones” are given in

Innoc. III. Epp. 1. xv. No. 234. The two former are also in Ann. Burton.

a. 1214. I think there can be no doubt that the three documents together

constitute the “quasi peremptorium mandatum ” brought by the three envoys

mentioned in W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 209. Cf. above, p. 160.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 242. * R. Coggeshall, p. 166.

* Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 210, and the letter patent in R. Wendover,

vol. iii. pp. 248-52, Innoc. III. Epp. 1. xvi. No. 76, and Foedera, vol. i. pt. i.

P. III.

12 13


1213

Two days later—on Wednesday, May 15—king and

legate met again, “with the great men of the realm,” in the

house of the Knights Templars at Ewell, near Dover. There,

by a charter attested by himself, the archbishop of Dublin,

the chief justiciars of England and Ireland, seven earls (of

whom the Marshal was one), and three barons, the king

“granted and freely surrendered to God and His holy

Apostles Peter and Paul, and to the Holy Mother Church

of Rome, and to Pope Innocent and his Catholic successors,”

the whole realm of England and “the whole realm of Ireland,”

with all rights thereunto appertaining, to receive them back

and hold them thenceforth as a feudatary of God and the

Roman Church. He swore fealty to the Pope for both

realms in Pandulf's presence, promised to perform liege

homage to the Pope in person if he should ever have an

opportunity of so doing, and pledged all his successors to a

like engagement, besides undertaking to furnish the Roman

see with a yearly sum of one thousand marks—seven hundred

for England and three hundred for Ireland."

One English chronicler says that John, in performing

this homage, acted “according to what had been decreed at

Rome.”* Another, not less generally accurate and well

informed, says that John “added it of his own accord ” to

the agreement already completed.” On the whole, it is

probable that this latter account of the matter is the correct

one, at least thus far, that the scheme originated not at

Rome, but in England. Not much weight can indeed be

attached to the king's own assertion, made in the charter of

homage itself, that the act was a voluntary one, which he

had done by way of penance and humiliation for his offences,

“not urged by force nor compelled by fear, but of our own

good free will and by the common counsel of our barons”;4

1 Innoc. III. Epp. 1. xvi. No. 77; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 252-4;

Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. pp. I I I, 112. The oath of fealty is given by R. Wendover,

p. 255, and in Foedera, p. 112. Roger makes the date Ascension Eve, but it

was really the Wednesday in the week before Rogation Sunday.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 252.

* “Addidit autem hoc ex suo,” W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 210.

* In a private letter which he wrote to the Pope on the same day, John says

he did it “inspirante gratia Sancti Spiritus, ad perpetuam Ecclesiae pacem et

exaltationem,” Innoc. III. Epp. l. xvi. No. 78.


nor is the accuracy of this version of the transaction proved

by the fact that Innocent accepted it without remark in his

reply to John's letters on the subject," and that no extant

document emanating from the court of Rome contains the

slightest indication that the Pope had ever demanded or

suggested any proceeding of the kind. There is, however,

no perceptible reason why Innocent should have required of

John a penance of so extraordinary a character, nor why, if

he did require it, either he or his royal penitent should make

a secret of his having done so. On the other hand, John

had a very cogent reason for “adding something of his

own" to the agreement between himself and Innocent. If

he was to give up all for which he had been fighting—and

fighting successfully—against the Pope and the Church for

the last six years, he must make quite sure of gaining such

an advantage as would be worth the sacrifice. Mere

release from excommunication and interdict was certainly,

in his eyes, not worth any sacrifice at all. To change the

Pope from an enemy into a political friend was worth it, but

—from John's point of view—only if the friendship could

be made something much more close and indissoluble than

the ordinary official relation between the Pope and every

Christian sovereign. He must bind the Pope to his personal

interest by some special tie of such a nature that the

interest of the Papacy itself would prevent Innocent from

casting it off or breaking it. For a sovereign of John's

character no additional sacrifice would be involved in the

device which he actually employed for this purpose. To

outward personal humiliation of any kind John was ab-

solutely indifferent, when there was any advantage to be

gained by undergoing it. To any humiliation which the

Crown or the nation might suffer in his person, he was

indifferent under all circumstances. His plighted faith he

had never had a moment's hesitation in breaking, whether it

were sworn to his father, his brother, his allies, or his people,

and which he would break with equal facility when sworn

to the supreme Pontiff; moreover, he took the precaution of

* Innoc. III. Epp. l. xvi. No. 79.

I 213


182 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

inserting in his charter a saving clause which he could easily

have interpreted, had occasion ever arisen, so as to reduce

the whole transaction to a mere empty form." There seems,

in short, to be good reason for believing that John's homage

to the Pope was offered without any pressure from Rome,

and on grounds of deliberate policy.”

How far the credit or discredit—whichever it be—of

that policy belongs to John is, however, a question not

easily solved. Two years later, the English barons seem to

have claimed the credit for themselves. We are told that

they besought the Pope, “as he was lord of England,” to

take their part against John, “since he well knew that they

had at his command boldly opposed the king in behalf of

the Church's liberty, and that the king had granted an

annual revenue to Rome, and bestowed other honours on

the Pope and the Roman Church, not of his own accord,

but only out of fear and under compulsion from them.””

1213

* “Salvis nobis ethaeredibus nostris justitiis, libertatibus et regalibus nostris,”

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 254.

* If we may believe Matthew Paris, the Pope was not the only potentate to

whom John about this time offered homage and tribute. In Matthew's Gesta

Abbatum S. Albani, vol. i. pp. 236-40, and in his Chronica Majora, vol. ii.

pp. 559-62, is a long account of an embassy which John is said to have sent to

the emir of Morocco, Al Moumenim (Mohammed al Nassir), “significans eidem

quod se et regnum suum libenter redderet eidem et dederet, et deditum teneret

ab ipso, si placeret ei, sub tributum. Necnon et legem Christianam, quam

vanam censuit, relinquens, legi Machomet fideliter adhaereret.” Matthew proceeds

to give a lively account of the ambassadors' adventures, and of the rebuke which

the emir administered, through them, to the sovereign who had sent them on so

shameful an errand; all of which Matthew professes to have heard from one of

the envoys themselves. Unluckily for him, he has given two contradictory dates

for the embassy. In the Gesta Abbatum he represents it as taking place during

the Interdict; and Dr. Lingard has shown, by evidence drawn from Matthew

himself, that if it was sent at all, it must have been sent in 1212 (Lingard, Hist.

Angland, vol. ii. p. 325; cf. M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 566). But in

Chron. Maj. Matthew puts it after the reconciliation with Rome, representing it

as despatched by John in his disappointment at finding that transaction profit him

less than he had expected. The story of the interview between the envoys and

the emir, as Matthew tells it, has therefore a very strong appearance of having

been invented by that writer, as a kind of satire on John's submission to the

Pope; though the mere fact of some overture on John's part for an alliance with

the emir is neither impossible nor unlikely.

* In March 1215 William Mauclerc, John's agent at Rome, writes to John

that there have come thither some envoys sent by the barons to complain to the

Pope, “cum ipse sit Dominus Angliae,” that John refuses them their rights, etc.,

and he continues: “Supplicant autem Domino Papae quod super his eis provideret,

cum satis constet ei quod ipsi audacter pro libertate Ecclesiae ad mandatum suum




This, if correctly reported, is a distinct assertion by the

malcontent barons that they had deliberately chosen to set

up the Pope as temporal overlord of their country, and

that it was pressure from them which had compelled

John to do him homage as such. The truth probably

lies half-way between this version and that of the king.

Whether the “common counsel of the barons” was given

spontaneously to John and accepted by him, or whether it

was merely a response to a proposal which he had laid

before them, there can be little doubt that each party

adopted the scheme in the hope of turning it to account

against the other party. That on the side of the barons

this hope proved utterly delusive, while on the side of John

it was completely realized, simply shows once more how far

less than a match was the collective sagacity of the barons

for the single-handed dexterity of the king.

It was not till many years later that a great historian,

who was also a vehement partisan, denounced John's homage

to the Pope as “a thing to be detested for all time.”" The

Barnwell annalist, writing at the time of the event, tells us

indeed that “to many it seemed ignominious, and a heavy

yoke of servitude.” But the action of all parties at the

moment was a practical acknowledgement of their conscious-

ness that, as the same annalist says, John “by this act

provided prudently both for himself and for his people; for

matters were in such a strait, and so great was the fear on

all sides, that there was no more ready way of evading the

imminent peril—perhaps no other way at all. For when

once he had put himself under Apostolical protection, and

made his realms a part of the patrimony of S. Peter, there

was not in the Roman world a sovereign who durst attack him,

or invade them ; inasmuch as Pope Innocent was universally

held in awe above all his predecessors for many years

past.” ”

se vobis opponerent, et quod vos annuum redditum Domino Papae et Ecclesiae

Romanae concessistis, et alios honores quos ei et Romanae Ecclesiae exhibuistis,

non sponte nec ex devotione, imo extimore et per eos coactus fecistis.” Foedera,

vol. i. pt. i. p. 120. See Lingard, Hist. Eng. vol. i. p. 333.

1 M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 135.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 211.

I2 I 3


1213

May 23

John had, in fact, at one stroke cut the ground from

under the feet of all his enemies both at home and abroad.

The people resumed their ordinary attitude of loyalty on

Pandulf's assurance that it was once more, and more than

ever, sanctioned by the Church. The traitor barons found

themselves without a cloak for their treason, and were

reduced to send out letters patent repudiating all connexion

with the French king." Philip found himself without an

ally, and without an excuse for his enterprise. The believers

in Peter of Wakefield, indeed, still looked forward with a

vague expectation to Ascension Day. But the king himself

could meet its dawn without fear. He had ordered his

royal tent to be set up in a large open field, and caused his

heralds to proclaim a general invitation to all who were

within reach, to come and spend the festival day in stately

festivities with him. “And a right joyous day it was, the

king taking his pleasure and making merry with the

bishops and nobles who had come together at his call.” "

Still Peter's disciples were not convinced; some of them

took up the idea that the prediction might refer not to the

ecclesiastical but to the civil anniversary of John's coronation,

May 27, which in 1213 was four days after Ascension Day.

This anniversary, however, passed over likewise without

any mishap. Then the wise and the foolish alike began

to see that John had prevented a literal fulfilment of the

prophecy by lending himself to a figurative one. He had

“ceased to be king ” by laying his crown at the feet of

Pandulf, to take it back again on conditions which un-

questionably helped to fix it, for the time at least, more

securely than ever on his brow. The scapegoat of all

parties was the unlucky prophet himself. Next day he and

his son, who had been imprisoned with him, were tied each

to a horse's tail, dragged thus from Corfe to Wareham, and

there hanged.”

Pandulf meanwhile had returned to France, and com-

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 211.

* Ib. p. 212. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 255, 256.

* W. Coventry and R. Wendover, ll.cc. Cf. Hist, des Ducs, pp. 125,

126; and R. Coggeshall, p. 167. The date, May 28, is given in Ann. Waverl.

a. I2 I3.


manded Philip, on pain of the Pope's displeasure, to lay aside

all thoughts of invading England and go home in peace.

Philip at first indignantly refused to abandon a scheme

which, he said, he had planned at the Pope's instigation, and

for which he had already spent more than sixty thousand

pounds." But he dared not go on in the teeth of the papal

prohibition ; so he turned his wrath upon the one great

feudatary of his realm who had refused to take part in the

projected invasion, Count Ferrand of Flanders. Ordering

his fleet to sail round as quickly as possible to Swine, the

king dashed into Flanders at the head of all his forces.

Ferrand besought help of John, with whom he was already

in alliance; and John at once despatched five hundred ships,

carrying a large body of horse and foot under the command

of his half-brother Earl William of Salisbury and the counts

of Holland and Boulogne.” They sailed on Tuesday, May

28, intending to land at Swine and march across the country

to join Ferrand ; but a contrary wind delayed them so that

they did not reach Swine till Thursday, the 30th ; and then,

to their amazement, they found the harbour occupied by the

French fleet, which, however, they soon discovered to be

unguarded save by a few seamen, all the troops having gone

ashore to ravage the neighbourhood. Salisbury at once

ordered an attack; the French sailors were speedily

overcome; three hundred ships laden with provisions were

set drifting towards England, a hundred more were rifled of

their contents and then set on fire. “Never came so much

wealth into England since King Arthur went to conquer it,”

says a contemporary poet.* Next day Count Ferrand came

to meet his allies, and renewed his league with John.” On

the Saturday—Whitsun Eve—the earls disembarked their

troops and advanced to attack the French at Dam. The

overwhelming numbers of the enemy, who were headed by

1. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 256; Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 112.

2 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 257. Cf. W. Armor. Gesta P. A. cc. 169, 17o ;

and Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 99.

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 14612-40 ; Hist, des Ducs, p. 130 (the dates are

from this writer); R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 258; and W. Coventry, vol. ii.

p. 2 II.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 131. Cf. Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. Ioo.

1213


King Philip himself, compelled them to retreat. Salisbury,

however, not only escaped to his ships, but brought all his

prizes safe to England;" while Philip was so mad with rage

at the disaster to his fleet that he ordered the remnant of it

to be burnt.” So far as England was concerned, his expedi-

tion was at an end.

John at once resolved that the fleet and the host which

had been gathered for the defence of England should be

used for an attack upon France. His plan was, while

strengthening Ferrand's hands so as to keep Philip busy in

Flanders, himself to land with an army in Poitou, and thus

place the French kingdom between two fires. At the end of

June he reassembled his forces at Porchester, and again

despatched William of Salisbury to Flanders with further

reinforcements and large sums of money. The magnates,

however, refused to accompany the king over sea till he was

absolved from excommunication.” Their excuse was trans-

parently false; his public absolution was indeed committed

to Archbishop Stephen, and therefore deferred till Stephen's

arrival in England ; but Pandulf had, in the Pope's name,

declared him reconciled to the Church. It could only be

from political motives that men who had without protest

marched with the excommunicate king against Scotland,

Ireland and Wales, and gathered year after year at his

festival banquets, now suddenly became more punctilious

about a matter of ecclesiastical discipline than Innocent III.

himself. It was, however, no moment for quarrelling with them

openly; and their excuse, such as it was, soon ceased to exist.

King and legate had been rapidly pushing on the

arrangements for the return of the exiles; * and in June

or July Archbishop Stephen and four of the bishops

1213

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 131-3; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 21 1 ; R. Wendover,

vol. iii. p. 258. Salisbury was wrecked on the Northumberland coast on his

return, but nothing was lost, Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 14649-58.

* W. Coventry, l.c.; Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 14641-6.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 259, and W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 212.

John was at Porchester June 16, and at Bishopstoke June 17-20 and June 29-

July 1 ; /tin. a. 15. For Salisbury's mission, see Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. Ioob,

IoI (June 22 and 26).

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 259, 26o ; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 21 1 ;

Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 98 b, 99, 99 b, Ioo, Ioob ; Rot. Chart. pp. 193 b, 194.


landed at Dover." On S. Margaret's Day, Saturday, July

20, they were received by the king at Winchester.” He

seems to have gone forth to meet them on the crest of the

hill which lies to the east of the city.” He threw himself at

the primate's feet, bidding him welcome, and with tears

imploring his mercy; “and the prelates and all the rest,

when they saw this, could not refrain from weeping.” The

procession made its way to the Old Minster and entered the

chapter-house; the king swore on the Gospels “that he

would cherish, defend and maintain the holy Church and

her ordained ministers; that he would restore the good laws

of his forefathers, especially S. Edward's, rendering to all

men their rights; and that before the next Easter he would

make full restitution of all property which had been taken

away in connexion with the Interdict.” This oath he seems

to have repeated publicly at the door of the church; Stephen

then formally absolved him, led him into the church, and

celebrated mass in his presence, accepting his offering and

giving him the kiss of peace ; “and there was great joy

among the people.” “

Having at last made up his mind to a formal reconcilia-

tion with both Pope and primate, John showed no signs of

a wish to evade any part of its terms. During the past

three months order after order had been issued in his name

for carrying into effect the provisions of his agreement with

Pandulf. The outlawry of the clergy had been revoked at

once, on May 15, and this revocation was repeated on

June 13.” Two laymen—Eustace de Vesci and Robert Fitz-

Walter—who had gone into exile, not in company with any of

the bishops nor for their sake, but on independent grounds,

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 213, says “mense Junio” ; R. Wendover, vol.

iii. p. 260, July 16; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 108, and Ann. Worc. a. 1213,

say July 9.

* R. Wendover, l.c. Cf. Ann, Tewkesb. and Worc. a. 1213, and Itin.

a. I5.

* The Ann. Dunst., which place the return of the exiles under a wrong year,

1212, say the king met them “in monte juxta Porecestre.” This is surely an

error for Winchester. Nothing is more likely than that John should have gone

to meet them on S. Giles's Hill.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 261; Ann. Dunst. a. 1212 ; and W. Coventry,

vol. ii. p. 213.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. Ioo, Ioob.

12 13


in the autumn of 12 12, had been specially mentioned by

name in John's agreement with the Pope, and promised

reinstatement in their lands and in the king's favour. Safe-

conducts were issued to these two barons on May 27, and

orders for the restitution of their property on July 17, 19,

and 21." For the bishops something more than mere

restitution was required; they, or the Pope and Pandulf for

them, claimed indemnification as well; and the terms of the

indemnity were difficult to decide. John seems to have

proposed that they should be decided by a kind of general

inquest; on the day after his absolution he bade all the

sheriffs in England cause a deputation of four men and the

reeve from each township to be at S. Albans on August 4,

“that through them and his other ministers he might ascer-

tain the truth concerning the damages suffered by the several

bishops, and what had been taken from them, and how much

was due to each.” Whether such an inquisition was actually

held does not appear; but early in August the justiciar and

the bishop of Winchester met the primate, the other bishops

and the magnates in a great council at S. Albans; there, in

the king's name, peace was proclaimed to all ; the observ-

ance of King Henry's laws and the disuse of evil customs

were strictly enjoined ; and the sheriffs, foresters, and other

officers of the Crown were warned, “as they valued their

limbs and their lives,” to commit no more extortions and

wrongs, “as they had been wont to do.””

John meanwhile had returned to the coast of Dorset,

where the host had apparently been ordered to reassemble,

with the intention of sailing for Poitou. In view of his own

expected absence from England, he is said to have com-

mitted the government to the justiciar and the bishop of

Winchester, bidding them “order all its affairs with the

advice of the archbishop of Canterbury.”* The king's

departure, however, now met with a new series of checks.

First the knights came to him in a body and protested that

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 99, IoI b ; Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 146.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 261, 262.

1213

July 21

and Gillingham.

* /h. p. 261. Roger says John went to Portsmouth; but the It'inerary

shows him hovering about between Studland, Corfe, Dorchester, Poostock,


the months which had elapsed since they assembled for

defence against the French had consumed all their money,

so that they could not possibly follow him any farther

unless he would pay their expenses. This he refused to do."

The barons of the north were the next recalcitrants;

when called upon to accompany him over sea, they “with

one mind and determination refused, asserting that according

to the tenure of their lands they were not bound to him in

this ; besides that they were already too much worn out and

impoverished by expeditions within the realm.”* The angry

king embarked with his household on August 5 or 6, and

sailed to Jersey; but finding that no one followed him thither

he soon came back,” in a mighty rage, “cursing the day and

hour when he had consented to the peace, and declaring that

he had been deceived, and made a gazing-stock for nothing.” “

His mercenaries and foreign auxiliaries were still a formid-

able host; and with these he set out for the north, “to

bring back the rebels to their obedience.” He seems to

have landed at Corfe on August 9; he began his northward

march from Winchester on the 16th, reached Wallingford

on the 25th, and Northampton on the 28th." On the 25th

Archbishop Stephen was in London, presiding over a great

council in S. Paul's Cathedral." Thence he hurried away in

pursuit of the king ; he overtook him at Northampton, and

remonstrated vigorously against John's plans of vengeance

upon the northern barons, telling him he would bring

contempt upon the oath which he had sworn before his

absolution if he made war upon any man without a legal

sentence. John “with a great clamour” declared that he

would not put off the business of his realm for the arch-

bishop, who had no concern with matters of lay jurisdiction;

and early next morning he set out, “in a furious temper,” for

Nottingham. The archbishop followed him, and threatened

that unless the project were at once given up he would

excommunicate every man, save the king himself, who

R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 261, 262. * R. Coggeshall, p. 167.

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 261 ; for dates see /tin. a. 15.

M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 141.

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 262. ° Itin. a. 15.

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 263.

:

1213

º


I2 I 3

should take part in any military expedition so long as the

interdict continued in force; nor could John shake him off

till he had appointed a day for the accused barons to come

and stand their trial in his court.”

Characteristically, John behaved as if unconscious of

defeat. He carried out his progress through the north in

peaceable instead of warlike guise, and did not return to

London till the end of September.” His arrival there was

timed to coincide with that of the papal legate who came as

the specially appointed minister of England's restoration to

the communion of the Church, and whose authority would

for the time supersede that of the primate. On Sep-

tember 27 Cardinal Nicolas of Tusculum landed in England.”

On the 3oth he met the king, bishops and barons at a

council in London, to discuss plans for a pecuniary settle-

ment between the Crown and the clergy. John offered the

bishops one hundred thousand marks down, with security for

the payment before next Easter of any damages in excess of

that sum which might be discovered on further investigation.

The legate urged the bishops to accept this offer; but they

preferred to accept nothing till they had prepared their own

estimate and could demand the sum total at once ; and the

king readily consented to the delay. Three days had been

spent in the discussion. On the fourth day, October 3, the

council reassembled in S. Paul's. At the foot of the high

altar, in the sight of clergy and people, the ceremony which

John and Pandulf had gone through at Ewell was repeated

by John and Nicolas. John resigned his crown into the

legate's hands, received it back from him, and swore fealty

to him as the Pope's representative; and the charter of

homage and tribute, which had been temporarily sealed with

wax and delivered to Pandulf, was sealed with gold and

finally made over to Nicolas, “for the benefit of the Pope

and the Roman Church.” “

Still the interdict could not be raised till the settlement

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 262, 263. John was at Northampton August

28-31, at “Salvata” September 2, and at Nottingham September 3; Itin. a. 15.

* Itin. a. 15. * Ann. Waverl. a. 1213.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 275, 276; Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 115. Cf.

W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 214. -


between the Crown and the bishops was completed ; and

another meeting for this purpose was appointed to take

place at Reading on November 3. To this meeting all the

interested parties came, except the king," who was at

Wallingford, where it seems he had appointed the northern

barons to appear before his court on All Saints' Day. The

legate was there too, and through his mediation the barons

were reconciled to the king and admitted to the kiss of

peace.” As John did not show himself at Reading, the

bishops went to Wallingford in their turn. By that time

John had moved on to Woodstock; but he seems to have

returned to Wallingford to meet them for a few hours on

November 5,” and repeated his former proposals. These,

however, “seemed little to those who had had their castles

razed, their houses levelled with the ground, and their woods

cut down"; so that it was decided to refer the matter to the

arbitration of four barons. But this arbitration never took

place. “All the parties concerned in the matter of the inter-

dict” came together again at Reading on December 6,” and

each of the injured persons brought forth a schedule of the

amount of his losses and damages; the legate, however,

supported the king in his refusal to pay the whole sum at

once ; and after three days' deliberation no one received

anything at all, except the archbishop and the five bishops

who had been in exile beyond the sea, to whom John on

December 12 ordered the payment of fifteen thousand marks.”

At last it seems to have been agreed that the damages

should be investigated by two sets of commissioners acting

together, one set appointed by the king, the other by the

primate, and that the sum to be paid by the Crown should

be fixed—doubtless on the report of these commissioners—

by the Pope; and this scheme was carried out in the

following year.”

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 276.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 1212 (i.e. 1213). “Quae pax non tenuit, quia promissa

non fuerant hinc inde soluta,” adds the chronicler.

* Cf. R. Wendover, l.c., and Itin. a. 15.

* R. Wendover, l.c.

* Ib. John's order for this payment is in Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 106.

* Such an investigation by joint commissions was going on in the diocese of

Durham in January 1214, Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 106 b.

1213


192 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

Other questions had arisen in connexion with the

settlement between Church and king. There were no less

than six vacant sees and thirteen vacant abbeys, all, of

course, in the king's hands. In July 12 13 John issued

orders for filling these vacancies in the manner which had

been customary under Henry II.; the several chapters were

bidden to send delegates, by whom an election was to be

made in the king's presence, wherever he might chance to

be.” This arrangement implied a tacit understanding that

the delegates were to elect a candidate designated by the

king. The bishops seized their opportunity to protest

against this practice and claim for the churches their

canonical right of free election, subject only to the royal

assent, signified by the grant of the regalia. The legate

seems to have been, passively at least, on the side of the

Crown; but John was anxious to avoid any fresh quarrel

with the primate, and he therefore allowed the elections to

be left in abeyance till Nicolas should receive instructions

about the matter from the Pope. These came at last in

a somewhat ambiguous form. Innocent bade Nicolas cause

the vacant sees and abbeys to be filled with men “not only

distinguished for their good life and learning, but also

faithful to the king and useful as helpers and advisers for

the welfare of the realm, and appointed by means of

canonical election or postulation, the king's assent being

sought thereunto.”* It was obviously possible to interpret

this letter as sanctioning, by implication at least, the claims

of the Crown; and Nicolas was quite willing thus to

interpret it in John's favour. John, however, knew that no

such interpretation would ever be accepted by Langton;

and with Langton he had no mind to quarrel at that

moment, even though he might have the legate on his own

side. He did indeed issue on January 2, 12 I4, orders for

1213

I2 I4

1 York, Durham, Chester, Worcester, Exeter, Chichester, Whitby, S.

Edmund's, S. Augustine's at Canterbury, Reading, S. Benet's at Hulme, Battle,

Ramsey, Peterborough, Cirencester, Eynsham (W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 213),

Grimsby, Wherwell and Sherborne (Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 147, 148, 150).

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 146 b, 148, 150, 150 b.

8 Date, November 1, 1213; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 277. Cf. W.

Coventry, vol. ii. p. 216.


the election of a bishop to Worcester and an abbot to

Eynsham, “according to the customs of the realm ";" but

he seems to have immediately afterwards made an arrange-

ment with the archbishop which satisfied the latter for the

time being. On the 12th John signified to Stephen his

acceptance of “the form known to us concerning the

making of elections, saving our right in all things”; he

abandoned his claim to have the elections held only in his

own presence, and delegated the power of giving them the

royal assent to the ministers who were to have the charge

of the realm during his absence beyond the sea; and he

closed his letter to the archbishop with the words: “Be

assured that there is no controversy between us.” On the

26th he wrote again to Stephen, requesting him to confirm

the election of the vice-chancellor, Walter de Gray, to the

see of Worcester, and issued orders for elections to five

bishoprics and three great abbeys.”

What made both John and Stephen anxious for an

agreement on this point was the king's approaching de-

parture for the Continent. Soon after Stephen's arrival in

England John had made up his mind that his expedition

to Poitou must be postponed till the spring,” and in August

(1213) he fixed February 2, 1214, as its approximate date.”

Throughout the autumn and winter the fleet was preparing

at Portsmouth under the superintendence of William de

Wrotham, archdeacon of Taunton." Arrangements were

also in progress for securing the tranquillity of the realm

during the king's absence. On June 3 John—according to

his own account at Pandulf's desire—had made a truce with

the Welsh to last till August 1.” By August 25 he had

enlisted the aid of the newly arrived primate as a peace-

maker between the English realm and these troublesome

neighbours; the wardens of the Marches were authorized

to agree to a prolongation of the truce till November 1,

1 Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 107. The name of the abbey is there printed as

Evesham; but cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 213.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 160. * Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. Io9, Io9 b.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 114. * Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 103 b.

* Ib. p. 106 b ; Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 156, 158.

7 Rot. Pat. p. Ioo.

O

1213




on the understanding that at its expiration the archbishop

of Canterbury would negotiate with the Welsh on the king's

behalf." Of these negotiations there is no further record;

but they seem to have resulted in keeping the Welsh in

check for some months at least.

In Ireland and in England John had to provide himself

with new vicegerents. In July Bishop John of Norwich

resigned the justiciarship of the Irish March to go to Rome

on a mission for the king; the archbishop of Dublin was

appointed justiciar in his stead.” On October 14 the office

of chief justiciar of England was vacated by the death of

Geoffrey Fitz-Peter,” who had held it ever since 1 198, when

he was appointed to it by Richard on the resignation of

Hubert Walter. It is impossible to regard Geoffrey as a

patriot; had he been one, he could scarcely have held the

reins of government under John for fourteen years without

coming into open conflict with his master. He was, how-

ever, a man of much weight in the land by reason of his

noble birth, his great wealth, and his knowledge of law, and

also because he was connected by kindred, affinity or friend-

ship with all the great baronial houses. Such a man was

necessarily somewhat of a check upon the self-will of John.

The king's personal feeling towards his minister found a

characteristic expression when he heard of Geoffrey's death:

“When he gets to hell,” laughed John, “he may greet

Archbishop Hubert, whom he is sure to meet there !” “

So long as the king was himself in England he could do

without any justiciar at all ; and accordingly no successor

was appointed to Geoffrey for more than three months.

John was, however, too cautious to venture upon any

glaring abuse of his newly acquired freedom of action" at

a moment when it was of the utmost importance for him

to conciliate all parties and all classes by every means in

his power. The one recorded incident of this period of

1213

* Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 103 b. * Ib. p. 102.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 271.

* M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 558.

* M. Paris, l.c. p. 559, makes John repeat on the death of Geoffrey Fitz-

Peter the remark which he has previously recorded as having been made by the

king on the death of Hubert Walter. See above, p. 113.


John's personal government, indeed, looks almost like a

dim foreshadowing of one of the most weighty innovations

which were to be made by the constitutional reformers of

the latter part of the century.

It seems that at the end of October or early in

November the tenants by knight-service were ordered to

meet the king at Oxford on November 15. On November

7 John sent letters to the sheriffs bidding each one of

them cause the knights within his shire to appear as

previously directed, with their arms, the barons also in

person but without arms, “and”—so ran the writ—“that

thou cause to come thither at the same time four discreet

men of the shire, to speak with us concerning the affairs

of our realm.”’’ This writ is the earliest known instance

of an attempt to call into council on “the affairs of the

realm" representatives of the freemen of the shire, as dis-

tinguished from the tenants-in-chivalry. Representatives in

the strict sense of the word, indeed, they were not; the

writ says nothing of how they were to be chosen, and

there can be little doubt that they would be selected by

the sheriff. Still, the fact remains that—so far as extant

evidence goes—John Lackland seems to have been the

first English statesman who proposed to give some place,

however subordinate, in the great council of the realm to

laymen who were neither barons nor knights, but simple

freemen. His motive is plain ; he was seeking to win the

support of the yeomen as a counterpoise to the hostility of

the barons. Unluckily we know nothing of the results of

his experiment, and cannot even be sure that it was actually

tried; for though the king was certainly at Oxford in that

year on November 15 and the two following days,” no

mention occurs, in either chronicle or record, of any council

holden there at that date.

At Christmas John held his court at Windsor, “where

he distributed robes of state to a multitude of his nobles.””

* First Report on Dignity of a Peer (1826), vol. ii. appendix i. p. 2, from

Close Roll 15 John; see Hardy’s edition of the Close Rolls, vol. i. p. 165.

In Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 117, the document is printed with an obviously

wrong date.

* Itin. a. 15. * R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 278.

I213

ſ


1214

Immediately afterwards Count Ferrand of Flanders came

over to cement his alliance with the English king by

performing his homage to him in person, at Canterbury, in

the second week of January 1214. Raymond of Toulouse

had been over shortly before; the fortunes of war had gone

utterly against him, and nothing but prompt succour from

John, in some shape or other, could enable him to hold out

any longer in his capital city, the sole refuge now left to

him. He is said to have gone back, after doing homage to

John, with a subsidy of ten thousand marks.” Early in

January the king announced to the primate and the bishops

that he himself was about to depart over sea, and begged

that they would lend their support to Bishop Peter of

Winchester and the other persons in whose charge he

intended to leave the kingdom during his absence.” At

the end of the month he put in train a scheme for con-

ciliating the eldest son of the late justiciar by marrying

him to the greatest heiress in England—that same Countess

Isabel of Gloucester who had once been married to John

himself." On February I John by letters patent appointed

Peter des Roches, the bishop of Winchester, to the office

of justiciar of England, and committed his realm to the

custody and protection of the Holy Roman Church, the

Pope and the Legate, leaving Peter as keeper of the peace

in his stead.” Next day he embarked at Portsmouth with

his queen, his son Richard," his niece Eleanor of Britanny,

and a quantity of treasure ; he spent a few days at Yar-

mouth in the Isle of Wight, and thence sailed to Poitou."

1. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 168; Hist, des Ducs, pp. 139-41, and Itin. a. 15.

The Flemish authority says “li cuens . . . li fist houmage de la tierre keil

devoit avoir en Engletierre”; the English chronicler says the homage was for

4 : all Flanders.” Unluckily there seems to be no charter extant to settle the

Pºs. Coggeshall, p. 168. Raymond seems to have been on his way home,

and travelling at John's expense, in January 1214; Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 106 b,

*.*. Claus. vol. i. p. 160.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. Io9 b.

* Ib. p. 110, 11o b.

° It is a question whether this means the queen's child so named, or that

elder son Richard who figures actively in his father's struggle with the barons

a year or two later.

7 Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 28o; R. Coggeshall, p. 163; and Itin. a. 15.


It was evidently of set purpose that the appointment of a

new chief justiciar had been delayed till the very eve of

the king's departure. When it came to the knowledge of

the barons, they all grumbled at having a foreigner set over

them ;” but they did not know it till the expedition had

sailed, and their discontent could vent itself only in useless

words.

Over sea the king's partisans were ready to welcome

him. At La Rochelle the barons of Aquitaine came

crowding to offer him their allegiance.* Leaving La

Rochelle on February 20, he moved northward to Mervant,

in the middle of Lower Poitou. Mervant belonged to

Geoffrey de Lusignan; and the king's visit to this place

may have been connected with some negotiations between

him and the Lusignan family which were certainly begun

soon after his landing in Aquitaine. He next proceeded

southward, to the abbey of La Grâce-Dieu on the border

of Saintonge; on February 25 he was at Niort.” Meanwhile

he had opened communications with the men of Périgord

and the viscounts of Limoges and Turenne.” On March 6

he was back at La Rochelle, whence he sent on the 8th, in

letters patent addressed to the “good men” of all the chief

cities of England, the following account of his expedition:

“Know ye that we and our faithful followers whom we

brought with us to Poitou are safe and well, and by God's

grace we have already begun to expedite our affairs to the

joy and gladness of our friends and the confusion of our

foes. For on the Sunday before Mid-Lent we laid siege to

the castle of Milécu, which Porteclin de Mausé had fortified

against us, and on the following Tuesday we took it.”"

Moving across Saintonge and up the Charente, he reached

Angoulême on the 13th, stayed there two days, then

advanced eastward to Saint-Junien and Aixe in the Limousin;"

at Aixe, on March 22, he granted the seneschalship of

Limoges to Emeric de Roche, and that of Périgord to

* R. Coggeshall, p. 168. - -

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 280. John was at La Rochelle February 15-20,

Itin. a. 15.

I2 I4

* Itin. a. 15. * Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 1 II.

* Ib. p. 111 b. * Itin. a. 15.

March 2

March 4


I2I4

Geoffrey Teyson." On Palm Sunday, March 23, he left

Aixe, and thence he struck right across the county of La

Marche to Saint-Vaury and La Souterraine, on the southern

border of Berry; he spent Good Friday and Easter at La

Souterraine,” and there, on Easter Day (March 30), he

received the homage of the count of Périgord.” He then

re-crossed La Marche and the Limousin—stopping this time

for two days at Grandmont, where the monks evidently still

had a ready welcome for the son of their old friend King

Henry — back to Limoges and Angoulême, Cognac and

Saintes; thence, turning southward, he proceeded through

Périgord as far as La Réole in the county of Agen. On

April 20 he was back at Mausé in Saintonge, and for the

next fortnight he was never far from either La Rochelle or

Niort; but on May 6 he was at Saint-Léger in Anjou, and it

was there that he spent Ascension Day, May 8. Two days

later he was again at Niort.”

The panegyrist of Philip Augustus asserts that John's

sudden dash into the lands south of Périgord was prompted

by dread of Philip, who, “being desirous to meet him " in

the field, had hurried to the Poitevin border, and was

preparing to cut him off from his fleet. The same writer,

however, owns almost in the same breath that “no one

knows, ever has known, or ever will know, the way of a

serpent, of a ship on the deep, of a feather in the wind, or of

a deceiver” such as John ; and that Philip dared neither

attempt to follow him nor await his return, but hurried back

—after burning the rural districts of Poitou–to protect his

own interests in Flanders." John's erratic movements had

probably a double purpose: to baffle Philip, and to ascertain

the extent of his own resources in the south. Of more real

importance than these tentative excursions was a negotiation

which he had set on foot with the house of Lusignan, whose

alliance and allegiance he proposed to regain by giving the

infant Joan, his eldest daughter by Isabel of Angoulême, in

1 Rot. Pat. p. 112 b. * Itin. a. 15.

8 Rot. Pat. l.c. * /tin. a. 15.

* W. Armor. Philipp. l. x. vv. 99-115. Cf. Peter of Blois's complaint (Ep.

xli.) of the impossibility of tracking the movements of Henry II.


marriage to young Hugh of La Marche, as compensation for

the loss of Isabel herself. The first preliminary was a truce

with the counts of La Marche and Eu; and it was probably

this truce which enabled John to pass unmolested through

La Marche on his way to and from La Souterraine. The

third Lusignan brother, Geoffrey, seems not to have been

included in the truce; and when it expired no terms of

peace had been agreed upon. “We therefore"—so wrote

John to his representatives in England—“on the Friday

next before Pentecost transported ourself and our army to

Geoffrey's castle of Mervant; and although many believed

it impregnable by assault, yet on Whitsun Eve, by one

assault lasting from daybreak to the hour of prime, we took

it by force. On Whitsunday we laid siege to another of

Geoffrey's castles, Vouvant, in which was he himself with his

two sons; and when we had plied our slings against it

continually for three days, so that its fall was imminent, the

count of La Marche came to us and caused the said Geoffrey

to surrender himself to our mercy, with his two sons, his

castle, and all that was in it.” Another of Geoffrey's castles,

Montcontour, which lay farther east, close to the Angevin

border, was at the same time besieged by Louis of France.

The French king seems to have discovered the negotiations

of the Lusignans with his rival, and to have been so much

alarmed at the prospect of a reconciliation which would

deprive him of his best helpers in Aquitaine that he tried to

prevent it by offering a son of his own as bridegroom for

little Joan; but Joan's father was too wary to take the

French bait. On learning that Louis was at Montcontour,

“we,” says John, “at once turned thitherward to meet him ;

so that on Trinity Sunday we were at Parthenay, where the

count of La Marche and the count of Eu came to us with

the said Geoffrey of Lusignan and did us homage and fealty.

