                .... Johan sanz Terre,
     Por qui il[1] ot tant noise e guere.
 
               _Estoire de la Guerre Sainte_, vv. 101, 102.
 
 
 [Sidenote: 1167]
 
 The fifth son, the eighth and last child, of Henry II. of England and
 Eleanor of Aquitaine was born at Oxford, in the “King’s manor”--that
 is, the palace of Beaumont--on Christmas Eve 1167.[2] Of their six
 other surviving children, the three younger were daughters; the last of
 these, Joanna, was then two years old. The eldest living son, Henry,
 was nearly thirteen; Richard was ten, and Geoffrey nine. The boy Henry
 had, when an infant, been acknowledged by the barons of England as
 heir to the crown,[3] and in 1160 had done homage to Louis of France
 for the duchy of Normandy.[4] In 1162 preparations had been made for
 his crowning in England, and he had again received the homage of the
 barons,[5] to which that of the Welsh princes and the Scot king was
 added in 1163.[6] Eleanor’s duchy of Aquitaine had been destined for
 her second surviving son, Richard, as early as 1159,[7] when he was
 not yet two years old. In the summer of 1166 the king had secured
 Britanny for Geoffrey by betrothing him to its heiress.[8] The whole
 Angevin dominions, with one exception, were thus, in design at least,
 partitioned among John’s brothers before John himself was born. The
 exception was, indeed, an important one; in the contemporary accounts
 of Henry’s plans during this period for the distribution of his
 territories, there is no mention of Anjou and its dependency Touraine.
 The reason, however, is obvious. Anjou was the cradle of his race, the
 very heart and centre of his dominion, the one portion of it which he
 had inherited from his forefathers in unbroken male descent, by a right
 which had been always undisputed and indisputable. The destiny of Anjou
 was therefore as yet unspecified, not because Henry was reserving it
 for a possible younger son, but because its devolution to his eldest
 son, as head of the Angevin house after him, was in his mind a matter
 of course. It was in fact Henry himself who gave to his new-born child
 the name which has clung to him ever since--“Johans Sanz Terre,” John
 Lackland.[9]
 
 [Sidenote: 1169]
 
 Two years later the scheme of partition was fully developed, and now
 Anjou was explicitly included in it. At Epiphany 1169 Louis of France
 granted to the younger Henry the investiture of Anjou and Maine, on
 the understanding that the boy was to hold these fiefs, as well as
 Normandy, in his own person, directly of the French crown. Richard was
 invested, on the same terms, with the county of Poitou and the duchy
 of Aquitaine. Britanny was granted to young Henry, to be holden by his
 brother Geoffrey of him as mesne lord, under the king of France as
 overlord.[10] The one fragment of the continental dominions of the
 Angevin house which the king of England formally reserved to himself
 was Touraine; his homage for it was due to a prince of inferior rank,
 the count of Blois, and his paternal pride chose rather to perform that
 homage himself than to suffer it to be performed by any of his sons.[11]
 
 [Sidenote: 1170]
 
 All these arrangements were as yet merely prospective. Henry had no
 intention of abdicating, nor of depriving Eleanor of her rights as
 duchess of Aquitaine and countess of Poitou, nor even of dispossessing
 the reigning duke of Britanny. His purpose was simply to insure that,
 were he himself unexpectedly to become disabled or die, there should be
 no fair pretext for fighting over his inheritance or defrauding any of
 his sons of their shares, but that they should be bound to each other,
 and their overlord Louis bound to each and all of them, by such legal
 ties as none of the parties could lightly venture to set at defiance.
 In June 1170 the scheme was completed by the coronation of the younger
 Henry at Westminster. Two months later the elder king fell sick at
 La Motte-de-Ger, near Domfront. Believing his end to be at hand, he
 confirmed the partition of January 1169, and solemnly bequeathed the
 one son who had no share in it--John--to the guardianship of his eldest
 brother, “the young king,” “that he might advance him and maintain
 him.”[12] One contemporary historian adds: “And he (the king) gave
 to his youngest son John the county of Mortain.”[13] The meaning of
 this probably is that Henry expressed a wish, or made a suggestion,
 that his successor should provide for John by investing him with
 Mortain.[14] From the days of the Conqueror downwards, this Norman
 county had always been held by some junior member of the Norman ducal
 house. Henry I. had granted it to his favourite nephew, Stephen; it
 had passed to Stephen’s son William, and afterwards to his daughter
 Mary; in 1168, Mary’s husband, Count Matthew of Boulogne, had ceded it
 to Henry II., on condition that a heavy sum charged upon its revenues
 should be paid annually to his two daughters.[15] Its actual value,
 therefore, was now very small; and Henry on his recovery seems to have
 abandoned, for the time at least, his project of bestowing it on John.
 A year later his diplomacy had wrought out a scheme for providing John
 with a far more splendid, as well as more valuable, endowment than
 Mortain, by betrothing him to the presumptive heiress of Maurienne.
 
 [Sidenote: 1171–1172]
 
 A proposal for this marriage was made by Count Humbert of Maurienne
 and accepted by Henry in 1171.[16] Humbert was then a widower for the
 third time, and had only two daughters. The marriage contract, which
 was signed at the close of 1172,[17] provided that if he should yet
 have a son, that son should inherit scarcely anything but the little
 county of Maurienne itself, which was only a small and comparatively
 unimportant part of Humbert’s dominions, stretching as they did along
 both sides of the Alps and including all the passes between Gaul,
 Germany and Italy. Except Maurienne, and a very trifling portion of
 land reserved as a dowry for his younger daughter, all Humbert’s
 territories--Rossillon-en-Bugey, the county of Belley, the valley of
 Novalesia, Chambéry and its dependencies, Aix, Aspremont, Rochetta,
 Mont-Major, and La Chambre on the western side of the Alps; and on
 their eastern side, Turin, Cavaur, Colegno, with the homage and
 service of the count of Canavesia, and that which the viscount of
 Aosta owed for Châtillon, and also Humbert’s claims on the county of
 Grenoble--were devised absolutely and unconditionally to John and his
 bride, and were, if Henry so willed, to be secured to them immediately
 by the homage of all Humbert’s subjects in those regions to the little
 bridegroom; while if Humbert should die without a son, Maurienne itself
 was to be added to John’s inheritance. The price stipulated for all
 this was five thousand marks, of which one thousand were paid over at
 once by Henry to Humbert.[18] It was not till the infant bride had been
 actually delivered over to her intended father-in-law, who was to bring
 her up in company with her betrothed till both were old enough to be
 married, that Humbert asked what was to be John’s share in the heritage
 of the Angevin house. Henry, seemingly on the spur of the moment,
 proposed to give the boy three castles with the lands appertaining to
 them--Chinon, Loudun, and Mirebeau.[19] Chinon was in Touraine; but
 Loudun and Mirebeau were in Anjou. The project was defeated by young
 Henry’s refusal to allow any part of his county to be settled upon his
 little brother, and it thus gave the immediate occasion, though it was
 certainly not the real cause, for his revolt.[20]
 
 [Sidenote: 1173–1174]
 
 When that revolt was subdued {1174 Oct.}, the political relations
 between King Henry and his elder sons were settled upon a new footing.
 The terms of this new settlement, while confirming the arrangements
 made at Montmirail for the devolution of Henry’s territories after
 his death, left no room for any doubt of his intention to keep them
 all, for the present at least, in his own hands. He covenanted to give
 to his eldest son, so long as he remained dutiful, two castles in
 Normandy and a yearly revenue of fifteen thousand pounds Angevin; to
 Richard, two castles in Poitou, and half the revenues of that county;
 to Geoffrey, half the dowry of Constance till they should be married,
 and the whole of it after that event. Richard and Geoffrey had to do
 homage to their father “for what he granted and gave them,” but young
 Henry was excused from doing the like in consideration of his regal
 dignity. For John there was now made a carefully detailed provision;
 he was to receive an income of a thousand pounds from the royal
 demesnes in England, any escheats which the king might choose to give
 him, the castle and county of Nottingham, the castle and lordship of
 Marlborough; two castles and a revenue of one thousand pounds Angevin
 in Normandy, and from the Angevin lands the same amount in money,
 with one castle in Anjou, one in Touraine, and one in Maine; and this
 settlement young Henry was made to promise that he would keep “firmly
 and inviolate.”[21]
 
 [Sidenote: 1175–1176]
 
 The scheme looks almost as if planned purposely to give John a foothold
 in every part of his eldest brother’s future dominions--a strip, so to
 say, in every one of young Henry’s fields. There was indeed no thought
 as yet of putting the boy into possession, of investing him with the
 county of Nottingham, or making him do homage either to his brother or
 to his father. The clause about escheats, however, soon furnished an
 opportunity for adding to John’s portion. In 1175 the great estates
 of Earl Reginald of Cornwall reverted to the Crown at his death,
 and Henry set them aside for John.[22] Henry’s plans for his little
 “Lackland” were in fact completely changed. The project of setting
 him up as “marquis in Italy” was abandoned; Alice of Maurienne was
 dead,[23] her father had married again, and neither he nor Henry seems
 ever to have thought of insisting upon the fulfilment of the clause
 in her marriage-contract which provided that in case of her premature
 death her sister should take her place as John’s bride. The settlement
 of October 1174 seems to indicate that Henry now saw his best hope
 of providing for John in his insular dominions, rather than anywhere
 on the continent. In 1176 there was added to John’s prospect of the
 earldoms of Nottingham and Cornwall that of a third English earldom
 and a yet wider lordship in the west. Earl William of Gloucester,
 the son and successor of Earl Robert and Mabel of Glamorgan, had
 been implicated in the recent rebellion. His three surviving children
 were all daughters, two of them already married. He bought his peace
 with the king by making John heir to all his lands, Henry in return
 promising that John should marry William’s youngest daughter, or, if
 the needful dispensation could not be obtained,[24] he would bestow her
 on another husband “with the utmost honour”; while a yearly sum of one
 hundred pounds was to be paid by the Crown to each of her sisters, as
 compensation for the loss of their shares of the family heritage. If
 William should yet have another son, that son and John were to divide
 the lands of the earldom of Gloucester between them.[25]
 
 [Sidenote: 1176–1178]
 
 Where John himself had been from his birth until near the completion
 of his fifth year, there is nothing to show. He seems to have been
 with his father at the time of the marriage-treaty with Maurienne, and
 throughout the subsequent revolt; “John alone, who was a little boy,
 remained with his father,” says Gervase of Canterbury, when speaking of
 the defection of Henry’s elder sons in 1173.[26] He was apparently in
 England when the arrangement with Earl William of Gloucester was made,
 September 28, 1176; and he was certainly with the king at Nottingham
 at Christmas in that year,[27] and also at Oxford in May 1177, when
 Henry bestowed on him the titular sovereignty of the English dominions
 in Ireland, and made the Norman-Welsh barons to whom he had granted
 fiefs in that country do homage for those fiefs to John as well as to
 himself.[28] A slight indication of the boy’s increasing importance
 may be found in two entries on this year’s Pipe Roll; the expenditure
 accounted for by the fermor of Peterborough abbey includes a corrody
 for “the king’s son John,” and fifty-two pounds spent in buying two
 palfreys “for the use of the same John.”[29] In August the king
 returned to Normandy; John followed him, travelling under the care
 of his half-brother Geoffrey, the bishop-elect of Lincoln;[30] at
 Mid-Lent, March 19, 1178, he was present with his father and eldest
 brother at the consecration of the abbey church of Bec;[31] and at
 Christmas 1178 Henry and John were together at Winchester.[32] During
 the next four years no mention occurs of John, save that at some time
 between Michaelmas 1178 and Michaelmas 1179 twenty shillings were spent
 on horses for him “in England and Normandy” by one William Franceis,
 who seems to have been a groom appointed by the king to attend him.[33]
 
 [Sidenote: 1182–1184]
 
 John’s earliest known appearance as witness to a charter of his
 father’s seems to date from the early part of the year 1182; his
 style is simply “John, the king’s son.”[34] This charter was given
 at Arundel. When Henry went over sea, in March, he left John in
 England under the guardianship of the justiciar, Ranulf Glanville.[35]
 Fifteen months later, the king’s arrangements for the disposal of the
 Angevin succession were all upset by the death of his eldest son,
 June 11, 1183. Almost heart-broken as the father was, one consolation
 immediately suggested itself; now at last he might secure to his
 favourite child some provision at once loftier and more independent
 than any number of Norman counties or English earldoms, and more
 substantial than his titular sovereignty in Ireland. In September Henry
 “sent to England for his youngest son, John, and his master Ranulf de
 Glanville”; when they had joined him in Normandy he sent for Richard,
 and bade him cede the duchy of Aquitaine to John and receive the boy’s
 homage for it.[36] This command shows clearly what Henry’s present
 intentions were. Richard was to take the place proper to the eldest
 son, as heir to the whole Angevin dominions; when he should enter upon
 his inheritance, his brothers were to hold the two great underfiefs,
 Britanny and Aquitaine, under him, just as he and Geoffrey had been
 destined to hold them under the younger Henry; and this arrangement
 for the future was to be made binding by the immediate homage of his
 brothers to him, although for the present all three sons were to remain
 in subjection to their father. The scheme was reasonable and just; but
 in Richard’s eyes it had a fatal defect. For the last eight years he
 had been actual ruler of Aquitaine, as Geoffrey had been actual ruler
 of Britanny. From 1175 Henry had given his second and third sons a free
 hand and left them to govern their respective duchies for themselves.
 Geoffrey’s hold upon Britanny had been secured in 1181 by his marriage
 with Constance; Richard had secured his own hold upon Aquitaine by
 eight years of hard fighting with its rebellious barons, and was now,
 in truth, duke by the right of the sword. But young Henry, the crowned
 king, had throughout these years been in England little more than a
 cipher, held in check by the authority of his father when present, and
 by that of the justiciars in his father’s absence; while in Normandy
 and the Angevin lands he had had no practical authority at all. Richard
 had no mind to give up substance for shadow. To be _de facto_ duke of
 Aquitaine was far better than to be merely titular duke of Normandy
 and count of Anjou; for the title of king, he knew, Henry would never
 again grant to any one during his own lifetime. Richard’s answer
 therefore was that, so long as he lived, he and he alone would rule
 Aquitaine.[37] In June 1184 the king went back to England,[38] leaving
 John in Normandy. John was now in his seventeenth year, and Henry is
 said to have given him permission to “lead an army into Richard’s
 territories and win them for himself by force.”[39] Whether he also
 furnished him with an “army” for that purpose, or how John was expected
 to find one for himself, is not stated; possibly the permission was
 nothing more than a hastily uttered word which the speaker never meant
 to be taken seriously. In any case, however, Henry’s departure over
 sea left John to his own devices, and to the influence of his next
 brother, Geoffrey of Britanny.
 
 [Sidenote: 1184]
 
 Two or three years later, Gerald of Wales sketched the portraits of
 Geoffrey and John both at once, in a manner highly suggestive of the
 close relations which the two brothers formed at this time, and of
 the points of likeness which drew them together. From that picture
 we can see what was the character of the influence under which John
 now fell, and what response it was likely to find in the character of
 John himself. Geoffrey was now a man of twenty-six years, a knight of
 approved valour, reputed scarcely inferior in this respect to either
 of his elder brothers, while he surpassed them both in eloquence of
 speech and subtlety of brain. “He was not easy to deceive, and would
 indeed have been one of the wisest of men, had he not been so ready to
 deceive others. He was a compound of two different natures, Ulysses
 and Achilles in one. In his inmost soul there was more of bitterness
 than of sweetness; but outwardly he was always ready with an abundance
 of words smoother than oil; with his bland and persuasive eloquence he
 could unbind the closest ties of confederation; with his tongue he had
 power to mar the peace of two kingdoms. He was a hypocrite, never to be
 trusted, and with a marvellous talent for feigning or counterfeiting
 all things.”[40]
 
 [Sidenote: 1184–1185]
 
 There was nine years’ difference in age between Geoffrey and John;
 but already a clear-sighted onlooker could see that the two brothers
 were cast in the same mould, morally as well as physically. Both were
 short in stature--shorter than their father, and far below the height
 of young Henry or of Richard; they were well built, but on a small
 scale. The likeness between them went deeper than that of outward
 form. As Gerald expresses it, “while one was corn in the blade, the
 other was corn in the ear”; but the blade developed fast. Before John
 was twenty, Gerald, though evidently striving hard to make the best
 of him, was driven to confess that, “caught in the toils and snared
 by the temptations of unstable and dissolute youth, he was as wax to
 receive impressions of evil, but hardened against those who would have
 warned him of its danger; compliant to the fancy of the moment; making
 no resistance to the impulses of nature; more given to luxurious ease
 than to warlike exercises, to enjoyment than to endurance, to vanity
 than to virtue.”[41] As soon as the king was out of Normandy, Geoffrey
 and John joined hands; they collected “a great host,” with which they
 marched, burning and plundering, into Poitou. Richard retaliated by
 harrying Britanny, till Henry, on learning what was going on, summoned
 all three brothers to England. They obeyed the summons,[42] and in
 December a “final concord” between them was drawn up and sealed at
 Westminster.[43] Whatever were its terms, they evidently did not
 include any cession of territory by either of the elder brothers to
 the youngest. Geoffrey was at once sent back to Normandy “to take care
 of it with its other guardians”;[44] and immediately after Christmas
 Richard obtained leave to return to Poitou.[45] The king’s project of
 transferring Aquitaine to John had been merely a passing fancy. Of the
 scheme for establishing him in Ireland Henry had never lost sight; and
 this scheme he now determined to carry into effect.
 
 [Sidenote: 1185]
 
 Before he could do so, however, a yet loftier destiny was proposed to
 him for his favourite son. At the end of January 1185 Heraclius, the
 patriarch of Jerusalem, came to England to implore Henry’s aid for the
 perishing realm of Palestine. King Baldwin IV. was dying; after him
 there was but one male heir left of the blood of King Fulk of Anjou
 and Queen Melisenda, and that one was a little child. From the story
 as told by Gerald it seems plain that Heraclius aimed at something
 more than merely persuading Henry to take the command of a crusade;
 his project was nothing less than a transfer of the succession from
 the younger to the elder Angevin line--from the infant son of Fulk’s
 grand-daughter to a son of Fulk’s grandson, Henry. When the king of
 England, after taking counsel with his “faithful men,” declared that
 he could not in person undertake the deliverance of the Holy Land
 from its enemies, Heraclius still persisted in his other request;
 he implored Henry to send at least one of his sons--if even it were
 only John--“that from this scion of the Angevin house the seed royal
 might be raised up and spring into new life.” The king, however, would
 not listen. John, it is said, was inclined to embrace the patriarch’s
 suggestion, and threw himself at his father’s feet to beg his consent,
 but in vain.[46] At Mid-Lent Henry knighted him at Windsor, and
 publicly gave out that he was to proceed at once to Ireland, where he
 was destined to be king.[47]
 
 [Sidenote: 1175]
 
 The dominions of the English Crown in Ireland were defined by the
 treaty made between the Irish Ard-Righ, Roderic of Connaught, and
 Henry II. in October 1175 as consisting of the ancient Irish kingdoms
 of Meath and Leinster, the cities of Dublin and Waterford, and a
 tract of land extending from Waterford as far as, and including,
 Dungarvan.[48] Meath had been granted by Henry in 1171 to Hugh de Lacy
 to hold in chief of the Crown by the service of fifty knights;[49]
 Leinster had been granted a few weeks before to Richard de Clare, earl
 of Striguil.[50] The cities of Dublin and Wexford and the territory
 appertaining to each of them, which had been held by the Ostmen, were
 not included in these grants, but were reserved by Henry to himself,
 and placed under the charge of custodians appointed by him. His
 authority over the whole area occupied by his subjects in Ireland was
 represented by a governor whose headquarters were at Dublin, and who at
 the time of the treaty was Earl Richard, the lord of Leinster.[51]
 
 [Illustration:
 
   I.
 
   IRELAND
 
   _according to the treaty of 1175_.
 
   _Kingdom of Roderic_ {CONNAUGHT}
   _Overlordship of Roderic_ {ULSTER and MUNSTER}
   _Domain of Henry_ {Small areas around Dublin, Wexford and Waterford}
   _Overlordship of Henry_ {MEATH (_Hugh de Lacy_),
     and LEINSTER (_Richard de Clare_)}
 
   _Stanford’s Geogˡ. Estabᵗ. London._
 
   London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.]
 
 [Sidenote: 1171–77]
 
 On the side of the invaders and their king, the treaty was made only to
 be broken. Henry on his visit to Ireland in 1171–72 had established
 constables of his own in two other towns, Limerick and Cork.[52] Cork,
 though not named in the treaty, and therefore implicitly included
 in that portion of the island over which he renounced all claims to
 ownership, seems nevertheless to have been continuously occupied by
 his officers; it was certainly in their hands in November 1177.[53]
 Limerick had been recovered by the Irish, probably when all Henry’s
 garrisons were recalled from Ireland to swell his forces in Normandy
 in 1173. It was, however, stormed and captured early in October
 1175--only a few days before the treaty with Roderic was signed--by
 Earl Richard’s brother-in-law and constable, Raymond the Fat, and his
 cousin Meiler Fitz-Henry.[54] They evacuated it, indeed, six months
 later, when Raymond was recalled by Henry to England on the death of
 Earl Richard in May 1176;[55] but Raymond’s infraction of the treaty
 was not the reason for his recall;[56] and the withdrawal of his
 troops from Limerick was due not to any order from the king, but to
 his own sense of the difficulty of holding a place so remote from the
 other Norman-Welsh settlements in Ireland. Henry, when he heard of the
 affair, merely remarked: “Great was the daring shown in seizing the
 place, but the only wisdom was in leaving it.”[57] In 1171–72 he had
 made, it is said, a grant of Ulster to John de Courcy “if he could
 conquer it by force.”[58] At the opening of 1177 De Courcy set forth
 to try whether he could make this grant effectual, and by February 2
 he had taken the city of Down.[59] Shortly afterwards, Miles Cogan,
 who was constable of Dublin under the new governor-general, William
 Fitz-Audeline, made a raid into Connaught as far as Tuam.[60] A few
 weeks later, Henry himself openly flung his treaty with Roderic to
 the winds. According to one account, he bade Earl Hugh of Chester “go
 into Ireland and subdue it for him and his son John, to whom he had
 granted it; for he had obtained leave from Pope Alexander to crown and
 make king in Ireland whichever of his sons he might choose; and he
 bade the said earl conquer the kings and princes of Ireland who would
 not submit to him.” The commission was probably given not to Hugh of
 Chester, but to Hugh de Lacy, who was certainly appointed governor in
 Ireland shortly afterwards.[61] However this may have been, in May 1177
 Henry, in a great council at Oxford, arrogated to himself the right of
 disposing at his pleasure not only of the territories in Ireland which
 were already conquered, but also of the whole of Munster. Leinster was
 at this time in his own hands; for Earl Richard’s heir was a girl, and
 therefore a ward of the king. He confirmed Hugh de Lacy’s tenure of
 Meath, and gave him the custody of Dublin, which carried with it the
 office of governor-general; he appointed William Fitz-Audeline--whom
 Hugh was thus to supersede as governor--custodian of Wexford, and
 Robert le Poer custodian of Waterford; and he defined the territory
 dependent upon the latter city as extending not merely as far as
 Dungarvan (the limit specified in the treaty of 1175), but as far as
 “the river which is beyond Lismore,” that is, the Blackwater. Moreover,
 he granted to Robert Fitz-Stephen and Miles de Cogan in fee, for the
 service of sixty knights, “the kingdom of Cork,” South Munster, or
 Desmond;[62] and to Herbert and William Fitz-Herbert and their nephew
 Jocelyn de la Pommeraye, on the same terms, “the kingdom of Limerick,”
 North Munster, or Thomond. From each of these grants the capital city,
 with the Ostmen’s cantred attached to it, was excluded, being expressly
 reserved by Henry for “himself and his heirs.” The recipients of all
 these grants did liege homage and swore fealty to John as well as to
 Henry.[63]
 
 [Illustration:
 
   II.
 
   IRELAND
   _according to Henry’s distribution, 1177_.
 
   _Domain of the English Crown._
     {WATERFORD and small arears around Dublin and Wexford}
 
   _Fiefs held of the English Crown._
     {MEATH (_Hugh de Lacy_), and
     LEINSTER (_Isabel de Clare, Ward of the King_)}
 
   _Fiefs granted by Henry but not yet conquered._
     {LIMERICK (_Philip de Braose_), and CORK (_Robert Fitz Stephen_)}
 
   {ULSTER and CONNAUGHT are outside the area marked as being claimed or
     held by the English Crown.}
 
   _Stanford’s Geogˡ. Estabᵗ. London._
 
   London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.]
 
 [Sidenote: 1177]
 
 The grant of Thomond to the two Fitz-Herberts and their nephew was
 shortly afterwards annulled at their own request, on the ground that
 this realm “was not yet won or subdued to the king’s authority”;
 evidently they did not feel equal to the task of winning it. Henry then
 offered its investiture to Philip de Braose, who accepted it; and this
 time the city of Limerick, with its cantred, was either included in
 the enfeoffment, or, more probably, Philip was appointed to hold it,
 when won, as custodian for the king.[64] The “kingdom of Cork” was also
 as yet unconquered; but here the grantees had the advantage of being
 supported by an English constable, Richard of London, in Cork itself.
 They seem to have compelled or persuaded the king of Desmond, Dermot
 MacCarthy, to some agreement, in virtue of which they are said to have
 obtained peaceable possession of “the seven cantreds nearest to the
 city,” and divided these between themselves, Fitz-Stephen taking the
 three eastern, Cogan the four western; and they seem also to have been
 appointed by Henry joint custodians of the city of Cork, in succession
 to Richard of London.[65] As for the other twenty-four cantreds which
 made up the rest of their promised territory, they agreed to divide the
 tribute equally between them, “when it should come.”[66]
 
 [Sidenote: 1182–83]
 
 Philip de Braose had helped Cogan and Fitz-Stephen to effect their
 settlement in Desmond; they now went to help him to gain possession
 of Limerick. As the three adventurers and their little band of Welsh
 followers reached the bank of the Shannon, the citizens noticed
 their approach and fired the town before their eyes. De Braose lost
 heart, and “chose rather to return safe to his home than to try the
 risks of fortune in a land so hostile and so remote”;[67] and it does
 not appear that he ever obtained any footing in the country. Cogan
 and Fitz-Stephen held their seven cantreds in Desmond and the city
 of Cork for five years; then, in 1182, Cogan was slain by an Irish
 chieftain,[68] and the natives rose at once throughout the district.
 They besieged Fitz-Stephen in Cork; his nephew, Raymond the Fat, went
 to his rescue by sea, and managed to throw himself and some troops into
 the city; while King Henry, as soon as the news reached him, despatched
 Miles Cogan’s brother Richard, with some soldiers, from England to take
 Miles’s place.[69] In 1183, or very soon after, Fitz-Stephen died;[70]
 Henry then appointed Raymond sole constable of Cork, and Raymond
 contrived to restore at least some degree of “English”--more properly
 to be called Norman-Welsh--ascendency throughout the cantreds occupied
 in 1177, of which the western ones were apparently now held by Richard
 de Cogan as heir to Miles, while Raymond was recognized by Henry as
 tenant-in-chief of the eastern ones in succession to Fitz-Stephen, who
 had no heirs.[71] The temporary loss of ground in the south in 1182 was
 more than counterbalanced by the successes of John de Courcy in the
 same year at the opposite extremity of the island, where he seems to
 have effected a permanent settlement in Dalriada, though probably only
 along the coast.[72]
 
 [Illustration:
 
   III.
 
   IRELAND
   _A.D. 1185_.
 
   {CONNAUGHT is outside the area marked as being claimed or held by
     the English Crown.
     As is ULSTER, except for the East coast (_John de Courcy_)
     and MUNSTER, except for the South coast (_Raymond the Fat?_) and
     (_Richard de Cogan_)
   WATERFORD, and the areas around Dublin and Wexford are marked as
     the Domain of the English Crown.
   MEATH (_Hugh de Lacy_), and LEINCESTER (_Isabel de Clare, Ward of
     the King_) are both marked as held by the English Crown.}
 
   _Stanford’s Geogˡ. Estabᵗ. London._
 
   London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.]
 
 [Sidenote: 1181–1185]
 
 The internal condition of the so-called “English” dominion in Ireland,
 meanwhile, was not altogether satisfactory to the king. It was of
 course necessary that he should have a viceroy there to represent him
 and to hold the feudataries in check; but for that very reason the
 viceroy was always, simply as viceroy, an object of jealousy to the
 other barons; and the viceroy who had been appointed in 1177, Hugh
 de Lacy, presently incurred the distrust of the king himself. Hugh’s
 rivals accused him of currying favour with the Irish in the hope of
 making himself an independent sovereign; and on his marriage with a
 daughter of the king of Connaught, a marriage contracted “according
 to the manner of that country” and without King Henry’s leave, Henry
 in May 1181 removed him from his office and summoned him to England,
 sending the constable of Chester and Richard de Pec to Ireland as joint
 governors in his stead. Hugh’s disgrace, however, lasted only six
 months; he returned to Dublin as governor at the end of the year.[73]
 Meanwhile Henry was providing himself with a new instrument for working
 out his purposes in Ireland. The saintly and patriotic archbishop of
 Dublin, S. Laurence O’Toole, had died in November 1180;[74] Henry kept
 the see vacant ten months, and then, in September 1181, gave it to an
 English clerk and confidant of his own, John Cumin. The new archbishop
 was consecrated by the Pope on March 21, 1182;[75] but more than two
 years elapsed before he set foot in his diocese. At last, in August
 1184, he was sent over by Henry to prepare the way for the coming of
 John.[76] It was doubtless for the same purpose that Hugh de Lacy
 was again superseded as governor; at the beginning of September he
 was replaced by Philip of Worcester, whose first work was to recover
 for the Crown certain lands which Hugh had alienated, and whose next
 undertaking was a plundering raid upon the clergy and churches of
 Armagh, achieved with great success in March 1185.[77]
 
 [Sidenote: 1185]
 
 On April 24 John sailed from Milford[78] with a fleet of sixty
 ships,[79] which carried some three hundred knights, a large body of
 archers, and a train of other followers. Next day they all landed
 at Waterford.[80] There the neighbouring Irish chieftains came to
 salute the son of the English king. The knights of John’s suite, young
 and reckless like himself, jeered at the dress and manners of these
 Irishmen, and even pulled some of them by their beards, which they wore
 long and flowing according to their national custom. The insulted
 chieftains reported to their brethren in more remote districts the
 indignity with which they had been treated; and in consequence, the
 kings and princes of Munster and Connaught not only refused to attend
 John’s court, but agreed among themselves to oppose him by force.[81]
 Archbishop Cumin, who had been sent over on purpose that he might set
 an example of clerical submission and lend John the support of his
 countenance as spiritual head of the province over which John was to
 be the secular ruler, of course welcomed the lad as his sovereign and
 gave him his homage and fealty, and so did the lay barons who owed
 their possessions in Ireland to King Henry; but among the survivors
 and representatives of the original Norman-Welsh conquerors the king’s
 son--like the king himself fourteen years before--evidently received
 but a half-hearted welcome;[82] and John did nothing to gain their
 confidence or their respect. He ordered castles to be built at Lismore
 and at two places on the Suir, Ardfinnan and Tibraghny;[83] beyond this
 he seems to have taken no measures to oppose the threatened coalition
 of the Irish princes and people; and while they were openly joining
 hands against him, he was spending in riotous living the money which
 had been destined for the pay of the soldiers who had come with him
 from England. When these soldiers demanded their wages, he met them
 with a refusal.[84] Some of them, whom he had left to garrison the
 new castles at Ardfinnan and Tibraghny, provided for themselves by
 making plundering raids into Munster, till they were defeated with
 great slaughter by the king of Thomond, Donell O’Brien;[85] most of
 the others refused to serve John any longer, and went over to the
 Irish.[86] Such was the characteristic beginning of John’s public life.
 Equally characteristic was the facility with which he escaped from
 the consequences of his criminal folly. In September, finding himself
 on the verge of ruin, he hurried back to his father’s court and laid
 the blame of his ill-success upon Hugh de Lacy, whom he accused of
 plotting with the Irish against him.[87] The task of repairing the
 mischief wrought by his five months’ stay in Ireland was entrusted by
 Henry to John de Courcy as governor-general.[88]
 
 [Sidenote: 1186–1187]
 
 Within a few months, however, the king again took up his cherished
 scheme with renewed eagerness and hope. “Lord of Ireland” was the
 title which John had assumed during his visit to that country,[89] as
 it was the title by which Henry had claimed authority over the Irish
 princes; but ever since 1177 Henry had been planning to secure for his
 son a more definite basis of power, by having him crowned and anointed
 as king. For this the Pope’s permission was necessary; Alexander III.
 was said to have granted it,[90] but his grant seems never to have
 been embodied in a bull, and Lucius III., who succeeded him in 1181,
 absolutely refused to sanction Henry’s project. When Lucius died, in
 November 1185, Henry at once despatched an embassy to his successor,
 Urban III., “and from him he obtained many things which Pope Lucius
 had strongly resisted; of which things this was one, that whichever
 of his sons he might choose should be crowned and anointed king of
 Ireland.”[91] This grant Urban is said to have confirmed by a bull,
 and by sending to Henry a crown of peacock’s feathers set in gold.[92]
 Bull and crown were probably brought by two legates who are expressly
 described as commissioned by Urban as legates for Ireland, “to crown
 John king of that country.” But these envoys did not reach England till
 Christmas Eve 1186;[93] and meanwhile, in August, news had come that
 “a certain Irishman had cut off the head of Hugh de Lacy,” whereupon
 Henry bade John proceed at once to Ireland and seize Hugh’s vast
 estates there.[94] John, however, was still in England when the legates
 arrived; possibly his father detained him on learning that they were
 actually on their way. But they had no sooner landed than they offended
 Archbishop Baldwin of Canterbury by wearing their mitres and having
 their crosses carried before them in his cathedral church; and they
 repeated the insult in the king’s court, to the great indignation of
 Baldwin and his suffragans.[95] Under these circumstances it would
 obviously have been impossible to let them crown John in Baldwin’s
 province; and if Henry entertained any idea of sending them and John to
 Ireland together, that the rite might be performed there, he speedily
 abandoned it. Baldwin, in fact, to rid himself of the legates, advised
 the king to employ them in France, as mediators in the disputes which
 were arising between Henry and Philip Augustus out of the death of
 Geoffrey of Britanny, the minority of Geoffrey’s daughter, and the
 critical condition of his widow. Henry accepted the suggestion, sent
 John to Normandy instead of to Ireland,[96] and himself followed with
 the legates on February 17 (1187).[97]
 
 [Sidenote: 1187]
 
 No pacification between the kings was arrived at, and at Whitsuntide
 both openly prepared for war. This was the first real war in which
 John took part; for his attacks upon Aquitaine in 1184 had been mere
 raids, probably directed by Geoffrey, and it was not under his personal
 leadership that his mercenaries had fought their losing fight with
 the Irish in Munster. Now he was appointed to command one of the four
 bodies into which King Henry divided his host; the other three being
 entrusted to Richard, Earl William de Mandeville, and Geoffrey the
 chancellor.[98] The position of these different bodies of troops at
 the opening of the campaign is obscure. One English authority states
 that when Philip began the war by laying siege to Châteauroux, Richard
 and John were both within its walls.[99] A contemporary French
 historian, however, who was probably better informed, says that when
 Philip besieged Châteauroux Henry and Richard proceeded together to
 its relief;[100] and it appears that John accompanied his father and
 brother, for we are told that “John who is called Lackland, being
 sent by his father, chanced to be present” when one of Richard’s
 mercenaries broke off an arm of a statue in the church of Our Lady,
 whereupon the figure bled as if it were alive; and John picked up the
 severed arm and carried it off as a holy relic.[101] One contemporary
 asserts that Richard’s subsequent desertion of his father was owing to
 Philip’s communicating to him a letter in which Henry proposed that
 Philip’s sister Adela, Richard’s betrothed, should marry John instead
 of Richard, and that John should succeed to the whole of his dominions
 except England and Normandy.