Even after its fall the garrison

fought on until their last morsel of food was gone; then at

last they surrendered on S. Andrew's Day." The king set

up a gallows in front of the army and declared he would

hang them all; but he yielded to Savaric de Mauléon's warn-

ing that if he hanged brave knights such as these, the barons

would surely do the like to any friends of his who might fall

into their hands, and that in view of such a prospect no man

would remain in his service.” On this he contented himself

with sending the knights to prison, leaving the men-at-arms

to ransom themselves as best they could, and hanging only

a few cross-bowmen."

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 226. R. Coggeshall, p. 177, says that John had

contrived to prevent some of the northern barons from joining them by means of

forged letters purporting to come from Fitz-Walter and his comrades, telling the

Northerners that their help was no longer needed.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 227.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 334, 335.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 163; R. Wend. vol. iii. p. 335.

* R. Wend. vol. iii. p. 336. In W. Coventry, l.c., John is said to have

hanged only one cross-bowman, whom he had had in his service from boyhood.

1215


1215

Three times since the siege began the barons in London,

or some of them, had opened negotiations with the king.

On October 17 Richard of Argentan and others had a safe-

conduct “to treat with us for peace between ourself and our

barons”; on October 22 Roger de Jarpeville and Robert

de Coleville had a safe-conduct till the 27th to treat with

the king concerning peace between him and “the barons who

may come with the Master of the Temple and the Prior of

the Hospital”; * and on November 9 a safe-conduct till the

12th was given to Earl Richard of Clare, Robert Fitz-Walter,

Geoffrey de Say, and the mayor and two, three or four citizens

of London, that they might go and speak with the bishop of

Winchester, the earls of Warenne and Arundel, and Hubert

de Burgh, “to treat of peace between ourself and our

barons.” ” On the side of the barons these overtures were

nothing but a cloak for the cowardice and incapacity which

kept them from taking any active steps for the relief of their

besieged comrades. They were all the while pushing on

negotiations for bringing in a foreign power to aid them in

their selfish scheme of revolution.

One chronicler asserts that as long ago as the year I 2 Io

some of the barons had contemplated driving John from his

throne and setting up as king in his stead a man who,

though born on foreign soil and engaged throughout his

whole life in the service of foreign powers, had yet a claim

to rank as one of themselves, and certainly not as the least

distinguished among them—Simon, count of Montfort and

titular earl of Leicester." To modern eyes the cruelties of

the war against the Albigenses, in which Simon was the

leader of the “crusading” host, have somewhat obscured the

nobler aspects of a character which was not without a heroic

side. It was indeed by a strange instinct that—if the

Dunstable annalist's tale be true—the chiefs of the English

revolutionary party fixed their hopes for a moment on the

father of that other Simon de Montfort, at that time still but

See the names of the knights made prisoners, in R. Wend. vol. iii. pp. 335, 336,

Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 241 b, and Rot. Pat. p. 161.

1 Rot. Pat. p. 157. * Ib. p. 157 b.

* Ib. p. 158. * Ann. Dunst. a. 1210.


a boy, who was one day to seal with his blood the work of

England's deliverance which they professed to have at heart,

but which in their narrow and short-sighted selfishness they

were alike unworthy and incapable of achieving. The in-

stinct was at any rate a loftier one than that which guided

them in their choice of a rival to John five years later. The

scheme put forth by the group of barons in London in the

summer of 1215 for electing a new king “by the common

consent of the whole realm" of course came to nothing; the

magnates would have none of it, and the northern barons who

had separated from the other malcontents before the sealing

of the Charter had, as will be seen later, made an indepen-

dent choice of their own. The mad little faction in London,

headed now by Earl Geoffrey de Mandeville, acted by them-

selves and for themselves alone when they “chose for their

lord” the eldest son of the king of France, “begging and

praying him that he would come with a mighty arm to pluck

them out of the hand of this tyrant.” "

Only one English chronicler gives or even pretends to

give any hint of the grounds on which this choice was, either

really or nominally, based. In no English writer of the time

do we find any indication that the connexion of Louis of

France with the reigning royal house of England, through

his marriage with John's sister's daughter, had, or was sup-

posed to have, anything to do with it. The claim to the

English crown which Louis afterwards put forth on this

ground seems to have been an idea of purely French origin,

which not only had never suggested itself to any English

mind, but, when it was suggested, failed to meet with general

recognition even among Louis's partizans in England. The

intricate rules of succession, and especially of female succes-

sion, which it pre-supposed were as yet, when applied to the

Crown at least, completely strange to English statesmen.

Moreover, it is by no means clear that the barons who offered

the Crown to Louis had any real intention of transferring it

to him and his heirs for ever. Roger of Wendover tells us

that “after hesitating for some time whom they should

choose, they at length agreed upon this, that they would set

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 225.

1215


over themselves Louis, the son of King Philip of France,

and raise him up to be king of England. Their reason

was that if through the agency of Louis and his father King

John could be deprived of the host of foreign soldiers who

surrounded him, most of whom were subjects of Louis' or

Philip, he, being without support from either side of the sea,

would be left alone and unable to fight.”” In other words,

they wanted Louis as a tool wherewith to crush John ; and

to gain him for their tool they offered him the bribe of the

crown, thinking that when their immediate purpose should

be accomplished it would be time enough to consider

whether the annexation of England to France would or

would not really profit them better than to break faith with

their new lord as they had broken it with their old one.

The first direct overtures of the barons to Louis seem to

have been made before the outbreak of hostilities, in Septem-

ber or October 1215; * and these overtures were renewed at

some time after the commencement of the siege of Rochester,

when the earls of Winchester and Hereford went over with a

message from their comrades in London to Louis, that “if

he would pack up his clothes and come, they would give

him the kingdom and make him their lord.” “ These envoys

were at once confronted by Philip with a letter which he

had just received, purporting to come from the same barons

and informing him that his son's intervention was no longer

needed, as peace had been made between them and their

own sovereign. The earl of Winchester offered to pledge

his head that the letter was forged by John.” The French

king accepted this assurance; but he was too wary to com-

mit himself hastily to a scheme so full of perils and difficulties

as that which the earls so lightly proposed, and he merely

gave it a negative countenance by standing altogether aloof

from their negotiations with his son. Louis promised that

he would at once send to England as many knights as he

1215

* Louis had inherited the county of Artois from his mother.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 359.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 225, 226.

* “S'il voloit venir en Engletierre sa cape toursée, il li donroient le régne en

boine pais et le feroient seigneur d’eus,” Hist, des Ducs, p. 160. Cf. W.

Coventry, l.c. * R. Coggeshall, pp. 176, 177.


could get, and would himself follow them at Easter. He

then called his own vassals together at Hesdin, and at the

end of November some hundred and forty of his knights

with their followers—in all about seven thousand men—

landed at the mouth of the Orwell" and made their way to

London, “where they were very well received and led a

sumptuous life; only they were there in great discomfort

because they ran short of wine and had only beer to drink,

to which they were not accustomed. Thus they remained

all the winter.””

John spent the winter in other fashion. On November

28—two days before the surrender of Rochester—Tonbridge

castle, which belonged to the rebel earl of Clare, had

surrendered to Robert de Béthune, one of John's Flemish

allies, and on the same day the castle of Bedford yielded

to Falkes de Bréauté. In each case the garrison had sent

to their lord for help, and in each case no help had been

given them.” John left Rochester on December 6, marched

through Essex and Surrey into Hampshire, and thence

proceeded to Windsor." On the 20th he held a council at

S. Albans.” Two of his envoys had recently come back

from Rome with a papal confirmation of the suspension of

Archbishop Stephen." This was read to the convent

assembled in the chapter-house, and committed to them

for transmission to all cathedral and conventual churches

throughout England. The king then retired with his

counsellors into the cloister “to arrange how he might

confound the magnates of England who were his enemies,

and how he might find pay for the foreigners who were

fighting under him.” He decided upon dividing his host

into two bodies; one was placed under the command of

Earl William of Salisbury, assisted by Falkes de Bréauté,

Savaric de Mauléon, William Brewer, and a Brabantine

captain known as Walter Buck, with orders to check the

1. Cf. Hist, des Ducs, p. 160, and R. Coggeshall, p. 176.

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 160, 161.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 349, 35o; Hist, des Ducs, pp. 161, 162. John

had granted the earldom of Clare to Robert de Béthune; Hist., l.c.

* Itin. a. 17.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 347. * 10. pp. 344-6.

I2 I5


irruptions of the barons who were in London; of the

other the king himself took the command, “intending to

go through the northern provinces of England, and destroy

with fire and sword everything that came in his way.”"

That same night John, with his division, moved on to

Dunstable; before daybreak on the morrow he set out for

Northampton, and by Christmas he was at Nottingham.”

All along his route he sent out parties in every direction

to burn the houses of the hostile barons and seize their

cattle and their goods; every obstacle that stood in his

path was destroyed; and as if the day were not long

enough to satiate his love of destruction, he would send

men out at night to fire the hedges and the villages along

his line of march, that he might rejoice his eyes with the

damage done to his enemies; while the other question

which had occupied his deliberations at S. Albans, the

remuneration of his followers, was solved with the produce

of the rapine in which they were not merely indulged but

encouraged. Every human being, of whatever rank, sex

or age, who crossed the path of this terrible host was seized,

tortured, and put to heavy ransom. The constables of the

baronial castles dared not trust to the protection of their

walls; at the report of the king's approach they fled, leaving

their fortresses to be occupied by him and his troops.”

Thus, “not in the usual manner, but as one on the war-path,”

he kept Christmas at Nottingham.” On the following day

he moved on to Langar, and thence, next morning,

despatched a notice to the garrison of William of Aubigny’s

castle of Belvoir that if they did not surrender at once,

their lord should be starved to death. To this threat they

yielded.”

Meanwhile, the barons in London had made no use of

the reinforcements sent to them by Louis. They seem to

1215

Dec. 20

Dec. 26

Dec. 27

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 347. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 177. Ralf

substitutes Gerard of Sotteghem for William Brewer; but in R. Wendover, p.

348, Gerard is named among those who accompanied the king.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 348, 35o ; confirmed by Itin. a. 17.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 348.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 228.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 35o.


have despaired of overcoming John by any means short of

an invasion headed by Louis in person with the whole

forces of the French kingdom at his back. Towards the

close of the year Saher de Quincy and Robert Fitz-Walter

went on another embassy to Philip and Louis, “urgently

imploring the father that he would send his son to reign in

England, and the son that he would come thither to be

crowned.” How or by whom he was to be crowned, when

the only prelate competent to perform the rite was in exile

and under suspension, and the rival sovereign was under

the direct protection of the Pope, they did not explain.

Philip refused to entertain their proposals without further

security, and demanded “twenty-four hostages at least, of

the noblest of the whole land.” The hostages were sent

under the charge of the earls of Gloucester and Hereford.

When they arrived, Louis began to prepare eagerly for his

expedition ; but there were still weighty reasons why, as an

English chronicler says, “he himself could not hastily set

out to undertake so arduous a matter.” So, “to raise the

hopes of the barons and try their fidelity,” he sent his

marshal and some others of his vassals with a second

contingent, some three hundred knights and cross-bowmen

and a proportionate number of foot soldiers, all of whom,

together with the English earls, sailed up the Thames and

arrived in London just after Epiphany 12 16; he himself

promising on oath that he would be at the coast, ready to

cross, “with a great multitude of people,” at latest on the

octave of S. Hilary, January 20.”

So, while John was pursuing his northward march, the

barons sat still and waited. The southern division of

John's host meanwhile was far from idle. Between Christ-

mas and the middle of January detachments of it overran

the whole of Essex, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Cambridge-

shire and Huntingdonshire, while the main body marched

to S. Edmund's, drove the insurgents who had taken refuge

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 359, 360.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 189, note 4. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 178, and

Hist, des Ducs, p. 162. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 360, has confused this second

French contingent with the first, which had come in November 1215, and

seemingly also with a third. See below, pp. 261, 262.

c

-

1215

I216

c. Jan. 8




there to seek another shelter in the Isle of Ely, followed

them thither, and sacked, burned and ravaged the patrimony

of S. Etheldreda as they did every other place to which

they came." Their leaders, before setting out, had charged

the constables of Windsor, Hertford and Berkhamsted to

keep a watch upon all who went into and out of London,

and if possible to stop the supplies of the barons there.

This latter charge either proved impossible to execute, or

the constables deemed its execution impolitic, and deliber-

ately preferred to let the king's enemies in London ruin

themselves by “lying there like delicate women, anxiously

considering what variety of food and drink could be set

before them to renew their wearied appetites.”* The advance

of Savaric de Mauléon on Colchester, on January 29,

perhaps roused them at last, for a report reached him that

they were hastening to relieve it, and caused him to retire

towards S. Edmunds,” probably to rejoin the other royalist

leaders who had been doing the work of destruction at Ely.

But the barons, still vainly waiting for their foreign ally

who came not, made no further movement; and even when

the royalists fired a suburb of London itself, and carried

off “plunder of inestimable value,” “no retaliation seems to

have been attempted.

While the barons slumbered—as a chronicler says—

the king was not asleep;" he was wreaking his long-delayed

vengeance on the north. The malcontents in the land

beyond the Humber had been quicker than their southern

comrades to recognize their need of foreign help in their

struggle against John, and they had taken a short and easy

way of obtaining it for themselves. No sooner had civil

war broken out in England in the autumn of 1215 than

the young Scottish king, Alexander, who owed his throne

and almost his life to the timely help which John had

given to his father four years before, marched into North-

umberland and laid siege, on October 19, to Norham castle.

1216

1215

*

1. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 349, 358; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 229,

and R. Coggeshall, pp. 177, 178.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 349, 352.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 178.

4 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 349. * Ib. p. 352.


s

Three days later the Northumbrian barons did homage to

him at Felton. No immediate results, indeed, followed from

this new league; the garrison of Norham seem to have been

as loyal as their castle was strong; at the end of forty days

Alexander raised the siege and returned home, just as

John was on the point of receiving the surrender of

Rochester; and for more than a month no further move-

ment took place in the north except an obscure rising at

York.” When at the opening of 1216 John entered York-

shire, the terror of his march to Nottingham had gone

before him and all thought of resistance was abandoned.

He reached Pontefract on January 2 ; its constable “came

there to his mercy.”* He went on to “his city of York,”

and “wrought all his will with it.” “ On January 7 and 8

he was at Darlington.” The horrors wrought by his troops

seem to have equalled, if not surpassed, those which the

Scots had been wont to perpetrate in their raids upon

Northumbria in their days of savage heathenism before the

conversion of Malcolm Canmore." A few barons “submitted

themselves to the mercy of the merciless one"; the rest

“fled before his face.”" From Darlington he seems to

have advanced on the 8th to Durham ; thence he was

about to turn southward again, when he learned that

Alexander had set fire to Newcastle-on-Tyne. Swearing

“by God's teeth" that he would “run the little sandy fox-

cub to his earth,” “John dashed forward to Newcastle; the

place was indeed burnt, but Alexander had withdrawn into

his own territory,” and on the 11th the English refugees

gathered round him in the chapter-house at Melrose and

renewed their oath to him on the relics of the saints. John

was on their track, burning and ravaging what little there was

1 Chron. Mailros, a. I2 16.

* See note 4 below.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 163; date from Itin. a. 17.

* “Puis s'en ala-il a Wrewic [var. Euerwic] sa cité, qui encontre lui s'iert

revelée ; si en fist toute sa volenté.” Hist, des Ducs, l.c. John was at York on

January 4, Itin. a. I7. * /tin. a. 17.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 351, 352. * R. Coggeshall, pp. 178, 179.

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 163, 164. Cf. M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. pp.

641, 642, and Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 172.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 164; for dates see Itin. a. 17.

I2 15

Nov. 28

1216


left to ravage—little enough, for the fugitives had set fire

to their own fields and villages that he might get no benefit

from them.” On the day of the homage at Melrose John

reached Alnwick.” On the 14th he assaulted Berwick;

town and castle were taken next day,” and the population

butchered, after horrible tortures, by his mercenaries. From

Berwick he made, in the following week, a series of raids

across the Tweed, and swept the country as far as Dunbar

and Haddington, both of which he burned. At last, seeing

that the “fox-cub” was not worth a longer chase and that

there was more important work to be done elsewhere, he

ordered Berwick to be burnt, fired with his own hand—so

the Scottish story runs—the house in which he had himself

been lodging,” and on January 23 or 24 began to move

southward. After stopping two days at Newcastle” and

granting a new charter to its citizens," he made his way

slowly back through Yorkshire. When at the end of

February he reached Fotheringay," all the castles in the

shire save two were in his power and garrisoned by followers

of his own, who were charged to hold the country and

continue the work of destruction on the lands of the rebels

wherever there was anything left to destroy.” Alexander's

dreams of conquest, the Northumbrian barons' dream of

independence — if subjection to their country's hereditary

foe could be called independence—were alike at an end.

Alexander, indeed, made a raid upon Carlisle as soon as

John's back was turned;” but it was a mere raid which led

to nothing. Far more significant is the string of safe-

conducts which shows how throughout the winter and the

spring the terror-stricken English rebels came crowding in

to make their peace with John."

John had now regained the mastery over the whole

eastern side of England, from the south coast to the Scottish

1216

1 Chron. Mailros, a. 1216. * Itin. a. 17.

3 Cf. ll.cc. and Hist, des Ducs, p. 164.

4 Chron. Mailros and Hist, des Ducs, ll.cc. * Itin. a. 17.

* Rot. Chart. p. 219. * Itin. a. 17.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 352, 353.

9 February, Chron. Mailros, a. 1216.

10 Rot. Pat. pp. 162, 162 b, 168, 169.


border, except a few castles in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex.

After spending a week in Bedfordshire,” probably to concert

measures with Falkes de Bréauté, he marched into East

Anglia. On March 12 he was at the gates of Roger

Bigod's castle of Framlingham; it surrendered at once.”

Next day he moved on to Ipswich; on the 14th he laid

siege to Colchester.” Here the garrison had been rein-

forced by a detachment of Louis's Frenchmen, who agreed to

surrender on condition that they should be suffered to march

out free and their English comrades held to ransom. John,

however, broke his promise to the Englishmen and put them

in chains. The Frenchmen on reaching London were

accused by the barons of having betrayed their comrades by

making separate terms for themselves; they were arrested and

even threatened with death, but it was finally determined to

keep them in custody till Louis should arrive.” On the 25th

John proceeded to Hedingham, which belonged to the earl

of Oxford, Robert de Vere; three days later it surrendered,

and the earl himself “came there to the king's mercy, and

swore that he would thenceforth serve him loyally.” Robert's

oath was soon broken ; * but his submission, insincere though

it was, indicates that the barons were losing heart. So, too,

does an application made at the same time by the earl of

Clare and his son for a safe-conduct to and from the king's

court." A yet more important result of John's recent

campaign was the supply of money which he had acquired

by the plunder of his enemies. This enabled him during

his stay at Hedingham to satisfy his mercenaries by a

general distribution of pay and gifts. Thus secured against

the risk of their desertion, he prepared to march upon

London.*

A third body of troops sent by Louis had arrived in

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 352.

February 29-March 8, ſtin. a. 17.

Cf. Itin. a. 17, and Hist, des Ducs, p. 165.

Cf. ib. and R. Coggeshall, p. 179.

R. Coggeshall, pp. 179, 180; for dates see Itin. a. 17. The king's safe-

conduct to the French soldiers (names given) from Colchester to London is

dated March 24, Rot. Pat. pp. 171 b, 172.

~

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 165.

7 Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 172 b. * R. Coggeshall, p. 180.

:

5

I2I6




London at the end of February, and a letter had been

received from Louis himself, announcing that “by God's

grace” he would “most certainly” be at Calais ready to

cross on Easter Day, April 1 o' Encouraged on the one

hand by this assurance, on the other the Londoners had

been stirred into a mood of dangerous defiance by tidings

from Rome. On December 16, 1215, the Pope renewed his

condemnation of the barons in such a manner that it could

no longer remain what circumstances had made it hitherto,

a dead letter. He excommunicated the rebels, this time

not merely in general terms, but mentioning thirty-one of

them by name; he also placed the city of London under

interdict, and he appointed the abbot of Abingdon and two

other commissioners to execute this mandate.” It seems to

have reached England about the end of February 1216.4

The commissioners sent it to all the cathedral and con-

ventual churches for immediate publication, and it was soon

published everywhere except in London. There the clergy

of S. Paul's, the barons and the citizens all alike rejected it

and appealed against it, declaring that it had been obtained

by “false suggestions, and was therefore of no account, more

especially as the ordering of lay affairs pertained not to the

Pope.”" This last assertion seems ridiculous in the mouths

of the barons, who scarce twelve months before had professed

pride in having compelled the king to surrender to the Pope

the temporal overlordship of England. It was in a spirit of

mingled rage at the downfall of the expectations which they

had once founded upon that surrender, and revived hope of

speedy help from France, that the revolutionists who held

the capital met the king's threat of attack. The citizens

opened their gates and arrayed themselves “ready to go

forth and fight with him if he should approach within ten

leagues of the city.”” Advancing slowly and cautiously, he

1216

1215

1216

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 360, who, however, has confused this contingent

with the former ones.

* Ib. p. 363.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 354-6.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 179, mentions its arrival just after the death of Geoffrey

de Mandeville, which occurred on February 22.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 357.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 180.


reached Enfield on the last day of March; * on the following

night he seems to have slept at Waltham Abbey, “seven

little English leagues from London.” ” But he came no

nearer. Savaric de Mauléon, venturing on a closer approach,

was caught at unawares and barely escaped with heavy loss

of men and with a wound of which he all but died ; a band

of “pirates” who attempted to block the Thames were all

either slain, drowned or captured by the Londoners; and

evil tidings came from the north how the rebels there had

risen anew, laid siege to York, and pressed it so hard that

the citizens had been compelled to purchase for a thousand

marks a truce till Trinity Sunday.” From Enfield the

king passed round by Berkhamsted to Windsor and

Reading, and thence went south into Hampshire.”

Of the northern rising we hear no more, but it seems

to have proved a failure, for before April 12 three of the

chief northern barons, Eustace de Vesci, Robert de Ros and

Peter de Brus, offered to return to the king's service on one

condition—that he would allow them to do so without a

fine. John's answer was as politic as it was dignified.

“What we desire to have from our barons,” he wrote, “is

not so much money as their good and faithful service”; and

he sent the three petitioners a safe-conduct to come and

speak with him on their own terms." On the previous day

he had given orders that the mayor of York should be

“competently provided ” out of the lands of the king's

enemies “for his good and faithful service which he did to

the king,” “no doubt in the defence of the city during the

recent siege. The mayor's loyalty and the king's prompti-

tude in rewarding it illustrate a feature of John's home

policy which is traceable through all the vicissitudes of his

career: his interest in the towns and the trading classes,

and his constant endeavours to cultivate their friendship.

All the while that he was harrying the open country,

burning villages and plundering castles, he was making

1 Itin. a. 17.

* Cf. Hist, des Ducs, p. 165, and Itin. a. 17.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 180. 4 Itin. a. 17.

* Rot. Pat. p. 176. * Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 260.

1216


1216

careful provision for the furtherance of trade, the security of

travelling merchants” and the preservation of foreign com-

merce from disturbance or interruption. With a French

invasion close at hand, he was still issuing safe-conducts to

French merchants in London and elsewhere.” For this,

indeed, there may have been a political reason; John was

anxious to keep on good terms with France in order to

counterwork the schemes of the barons in that quarter. He

had lately sent an embassy to try whether Philip Augustus

could by any means be induced to forbid his son's proposed

expedition.” One of the envoys at least, William the

Marshal, was back by Easter,” the day which Louis had

fixed for his own departure. That day passed and Louis

came not—hindered, it seems, by contrary winds." About

this time John sent a letter to Louis himself, signifying his

willingness to amend any injury which Louis might have

received at his hands;" and on April 28 he wrote to the

guardians of the truce in France proposing that they should

hold a meeting with his proctors for the settlement of all

disputes which had arisen from infractions of the truce."

By that time the projected expedition of Louis had

assumed an aspect very different from that which it had

worn when first suggested by the English barons in the

previous autumn. Philip as well as Louis was naturally

tempted by what looked like a golden opportunity for

annexing England to France; but he was held back by the

dread of offending the Pope, who had no sooner heard of

the scheme than he despatched a legate, Gualo, with instruc-

tions to proceed to France and England for the express

purpose of forbidding it. Philip saw that to make his son's

project tolerable in the Pope's eyes, and therefore safe in

those of his own feudataries, he must invent for it some more

plausible excuse than the flimsy pretence of election by the

excommunicate English barons. He had made out an

elaborate case in behalf of Louis and planned his own

1 Rot. Pat. pp. 170, 17ob, 171. * Ib. p. 172 b.

* R. Coggeshall, pp. 180, 181. * Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 175 b.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 229.

* Rot. Pat. p. 176. 7 Ib. p. 179.


course of action with characteristic wariness and skill, by the

time that Gualo arrived in the spring of 1216. On April 25

the legate was publicly received at Melun * by the French

king, to whom he presented the Pope's letters desiring that

Philip would not permit his son to invade England or to

molest the English king in any way, but rather that he

would protect and assist John as a vassal of the Roman

Church. Philip answered at once : “The realm of England

never was S. Peter's patrimony; it is not so now, and never

shall be. John was convicted long ago of treason against

his brother Richard, and condemned by the judgement of

Richard's court; therefore John was never rightfully king,

and had no power to surrender the kingdom. Moreover, if

he ever was rightfully king, he afterwards forfeited his right

to the crown by the murder of Arthur, for which he was

condemned in our court. And in any case no king or

prince can give away his realm without the consent of his

barons, who are bound to defend it.” This last proposition

was loudly applauded by the French magnates. Next day

a second meeting took place. Louis, according to a pre-

vious arrangement with his father, came in after the rest of

the assembly and seated himself by his father's side,

scowling at the legate. Gualo, without appearing to notice

his discourtesy, besought him “not to go to England to

invade or seize the patrimony of the Roman Church,” and

again begged Philip to forbid his doing so. “I have always

been devoted and faithful,” answered Philip, “to the Pope

and the Roman Church, and by my counsel and help my

son will not now attempt aught against them ; yet if Louis

claims to have any rights in the realm of England, let him

be heard, and let justice be done.” On this a knight

whom Louis had appointed as his proctor rose and set forth

the case thus: “My Lord King, it is well known that John,

who is called king of England, was in your court by sentence

of his peers condemned to death for treason against his

nephew Arthur, whom he had slain with his own hands,

and that he was afterwards rejected by the barons of

England from reigning over them by reason of the many

* See Revue historique, vol. xxxii. p. 49, note 2.

1216


1216

murders and other enormities which he had committed

there ; wherefore they began war against him, that they

might drive him from the throne without hope of restoration.

Moreover, the said king, without the consent of his magnates,

made over the realm of England to the Pope and the Roman

Church, to receive it back from them for an annual tribute

of a thousand marks. Although he could not give the

crown of England to any one without consent of the barons,

yet he could resign it; and when he resigned it he ceased to

be king, and the throne was vacant. Now a vacant throne

ought not to be filled save by consent of the barons; where-

fore the barons elected the Lord Louis on account of his

wife, whose mother, the queen of Castille, was the sole sur-

vivor of all the brothers and sisters of the English king.”

With this ingeniously-woven tissue of perverted truths

and dressed-up lies it was obviously impossible for Gualo to

deal on the spur of the moment. He evaded the point at

issue by pointing out that John had taken the cross, and

was therefore entitled to be left unmolested till his vow of

crusade was fulfilled. Louis's proctor retorted that John

had made war upon Louis both before and after taking

the cross, and that Louis was therefore justified in

retaliating. Gualo, without further argument, again forbade

Louis to invade England, and his father to suffer him to do

so, under pain of excommunication. Louis turned to his

father: “Sire, although I am your liegeman for the fief

which you have given me on this side of the sea, yet con-

cerning the realm of England it appertaineth not to you to

decree anything; wherefore I submit me to the judgement of

my peers whether you ought to forbid me to prosecute my

right, and especially a right concerning which you cannot

yourself dome justice. I beseech you therefore not to hinder

me, since for my wife's heritage I will fight, if need be, even

unto death.” With these words he left the assembly.

Gualo made no remark, but simply asked the king for a safe-

conduct to the sea, that he might proceed on his mission to

England. “I will gladly give you a safe-conduct through

my own domains,” answered Philip ; “but should you chance

to fall into the hands of any of my son's men who are


vil JOHAW LACKLAND 267

guarding the coast, blame me not if evil befall you.” The

legate departed in a rage. As soon as he was gone, Louis

returned, asked and received his father's blessing on his

enterprize, despatched messengers to Rome to lay his case

before the Pope, and himself went to collect his forces at

Calais."

On April 14 John had ordered twenty-one coast towns

to send all their ships to the mouth of the Thames.” On the

17th he bade the sheriffs throughout England make a pro-

clamation calling upon all persons who had been in arms

against the king to join him within a month after the close of

Easter (April 24), on pain of forfeiture for ever.” On the

20th he returned to Windsor; thence he went through

Surrey back to Rochester; * on the 25th—the day of the

council at Melun — he issued from Canterbury orders to

the soldiers then at Rochester to follow him immediately

“wheresoever he might be.”" He reached Canterbury that

night, Dover on the morrow, and spent the next three weeks

flitting up and down along the coast of Kent,” watching for

the arrival of both Gualo and Louis, and superintending the

gathering of the fleet and the preparation of the coast towns

for defence. The Cinque Ports were again pledged, by

oaths and hostages, to his service. Yarmouth, Lynn, Dun-

wich and other sea-ports sent their ships to the muster" at

Dover. As soon as it was complete, the king intended to

sail with his whole fleet to Calais and block up Louis in the

harbour, “for he well knew,” says a contemporary, “that the

little vessels which Louis had could not defend themselves

against his ships, which were so large ; one of his ships was

well worth four of those of Louis.” But towards evening on

May 18 a storm arose and swept over the fleet as it lay off

Dover, and by the morning the ships were so broken and

scattered that all hope of bringing them together again was

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 364-7. The version of M. Paris, Hist. Angl.

vol. ii. pp. 176, 177, is as M. Petit-Dutaillis says (Louis VIII. p. 95, note),

obviously nothing but an oratorical amplification.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 270.

* Ib. p. 27ob. * Itin. a. 17.

5 Rot. Pat. p. 178 b. 6 /tin. a. 17.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 181.

1216


lost." On the night of the 20th Louis set sail from Calais.

Next morning the watchmen on the shore of Thanet saw

some of his ships in the distance; they sent word to the

king, who was at Canterbury, on the point of setting out to

meet the legate, of whose arrival at Romney he had just

been apprised. He told the messengers from Thanet that

what had been seen were not the enemy's ships, but some of

his own which the storm had driven out to sea. But his

words were only spoken to encourage his followers; in his

heart he knew that the watchmen were not mistaken. He

seems to have ridden only a few miles towards Romney

when he met Gualo, clad in his scarlet robes as cardinal, and

mounted on a white palfrey, as beseemed the representative

of the Pope. King and legate dismounted and embraced.

John at once told Gualo that Louis had arrived; Gualo

pronounced the invader excommunicate, and rode with John

into Canterbury.”

Louis meanwhile had landed at Stonor almost alone ;

the greater part of his fleet did not even come in sight till

the next day, Sunday, May 22. John had now hurried to

Sandwich ; thence he saw with his own eyes the approach

of the hostile fleet as it sailed past the mouth of Pegwell

Bay. To prevent its reaching the shore was impossible ;

the only question was whether he should encounter the

French host as soon as it had disembarked and stake every-

thing upon a pitched battle. The trumpets were sounded, the

troops arrayed; but as he rode up and down along the shore

surveying their ranks his heart sank within him.” They

were, almost to a man, mercenaries and foreigners, most of

them born subjects of the French king ; what if, when the

fight was at the hottest, they should go over in a body to

their fellow-countrymen and their own king's son P. The

1216

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 167, 168. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 181.

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 168, 169. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 368, and

Ann. Winton, a. 1216, both of which give the same date for Louis's arrival.

R. Coggeshall, p. 181, gives a date which, though self-contradictory, is, I think,

meant for the same—“die sabbati post Ascensionem Domini, scilicet xiiii kalen-

das Junii.” W. Coventry, p. 229, is quite wrong. John had gone on May 19

(Ascension Day) to Folkestone; on the 20th and 21st he was at Canterbury.

Itin. a. 17, 18.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 169.


risk was too grave to be faced ; it was better to withdraw

than to court an encounter so likely to prove fatal." Such

was the counsel given to John by one of the few Englishmen

still at his side, the wisest and truest of them all, William

the Marshal.” For a while John hesitated ; then, as was his

wont in moments of disappointment and distress, he stole

away in silence, and had galloped a league on the road to

Dover before the greater part of his men knew that he was

gone.* Leaving Dover under the charge of Hubert de

Burgh, with a strong garrison and ample provisions," and

appointing the earl of Warren warden of the Cinque Ports,”

he made his way through Sussex to Winchester, where he

remained watching the course of events during the next ten

days."

The first act of Louis after landing his troops was to

issue a manifesto to the English clergy, setting forth, in

somewhat more blunt terms than he had ventured to use

in presence of the legate at Melun, his pretensions to the

English Crown, and exhorting those whom he addressed not

to be persuaded into thwarting his endeavours “for the good

of the English Church and realm" by anything that they

might hear from Gualo, whom he represented as having no

just grounds for opposition to him, and as having been

brought to England “by the suggestions and bribes” of

John." He then, after seizing a few English ships which had

put in at Sandwich after the storm, and plundering the

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 368; W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 229, 230.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 1215.

* Hist. des Ducs, p. 170. The assertion of William the Breton, Gesta P. A.

c. 221, that John actually did await the attack of the French, and was driven

away by their vigorous onset, certainly is, as M. Petit-Dutaillis says (Louis VIII.

p. Ioo), an error. That error is grounded, like the sneering comments of Ralf of

Coggeshall (p. 181), the Ann. Winton. (a. 1216), and some later writers, on the

mistaken idea that John was on the spot when Louis first landed on the 21st.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 17o.

* Rot. Pat. p. 184. 0 Itin. a. 18.

7 Thorne, Gesta Abb. S. Aug. Cant. in Twysden, X Script. cols. 1868-70.

The letter as there given is addressed to the abbot and convent of S. Augustine's,

but it was evidently a manifesto of which copies were sent, or intended to be

sent, to all the religious houses of note, probably also to the secular clergy, and

perhaps to be distributed among the laity as well. The character of Louis's

“case” as set forth in this letter, and in the arguments of his envoys at Rome

(R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 371-8), has been sufficiently exposed by M. Petit-

Dutaillis, Louis VIII. pp. 75-87.

I216




1216

town, marched upon Canterbury. The citizens admitted

him without resistance; * Gualo fled from his lodgings in

S. Augustine's abbey; the abbot, who was John's foster-

brother, alone refused all submission to the invader.” From

Canterbury Louis proceeded to Rochester, where he was

joined by his men from London.” The mighty fortress which

had cost John a siege of nearly two months surrendered to

Louis in less than a week, on Whit Monday, May 30."

Already the forebodings of the king and the Marshal were

more than justified; John's mercenaries were deserting, and

not only those barons who had been recently preparing, or

pretending to prepare, to return to their allegiance, but even

many of those who had hitherto seemed loyal to him, now

joined the leaders of the revolution in doing homage to the

invader." On Whitsun Eve (May 28) Gualo had rejoined

the king at Winchester," after issuing a citation to the

English bishops and clergy to meet him there “in aid of the

king and the kingdom.” On Whit Sunday, in their presence,

he excommunicated Louis by name, together with all his

followers and adherents, whose lands, as well as the city of

London, he laid under interdict." The sentence was dis-

regarded ; on June 2 Louis entered London;" the citizens

welcomed him joyously, and the canons of S. Paul's received

him with a procession in their cathedral church.” Next day

he received the homage of the barons and citizens, headed

respectively by Robert Fitz-Walter and the mayor, William

Hardel." He then swore on the Gospels “that he would

restore to all of them their good laws and their lost heritages,”

and wrote to the king of Scots and all the English magnates

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 170, 171 ; cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 181, and Ann. Dunst.

a. 1216. * Thorne, l.c. cols. 1864, 1870.

* Hist des Ducs, p. 171.

* Chron. Merton. in Petit-Dutaillis, Louis VIII. p. 514.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 230 ; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 370.

° Ann. Winton. a. 1216.

7 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 230. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 369, 370.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 171 ; W. Coventry, l.c.; Liber de Antig. Legibus,

Appendix, p. 202.

* Hist, des Ducs, l.c. Liber de Antig. Legibus, l.c.

19 Chron. Merton. in Petit-Dutaillis, Louis VIII. p. 514. Cf. Hist, des Ducs,

pp. 171, 172 ; R. Coggeshall, pp. 181, 182, and R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp.

368, 369.


who had not yet joined him “bidding them either come and

do him homage, or quit the realm of England without

delay.” "

On June 6 Louis started from London * to seek out his

rival at Winchester,” but he was already too late; John

had quitted Winchester the day before,” leaving it, with its

two castles, under the command of Savaric de Mauléon.”

Louis's first day's march from London brought him to

Reigate, which he entered without opposition, the earl of

Warren having withdrawn his garrison from the castle. The

royal castle of Guildford surrendered on the 8th, Farnham,

which belonged to the see of Canterbury, on the I oth." On

the 14th Louis reached Winchester." Savaric de Mauléon

was, it seems, under orders to rejoin the king when he saw

the enemy approaching the city and had completed his

preparations for its defence. With the idea, doubtless, of

checking the entrance of the foe, he, or some of his followers,

set fire to the suburb before he left it. Unluckily the flames

spread into the city and laid half of it in ashes. Defence

became impossible, and the French marched in to take un-

disputed possession.” John and Savaric had, however, left

a strong garrison in the “chief castle”” at the west end of

the city; the bishop's stronghold of Wolvesey too, at the

eastern end, was well provided with defenders, among whom

was one of the king's sons, a young squire named Oliver.”

For ten days Louis plied his engines against the “chief

castle”; then on June 24 Savaric returned with a licence

from the king to negotiate for its surrender and that

of Wolvesey. The garrisons were suffered to withdraw,

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 369.

* Hist, des Ducs, pp. 171, 172.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 182.

* Itin. a. 18. This disposes of R. Coggeshall's story (l.c.) that John “cognito

ejus adventu, draconem suum deposuit et aufugit.”

* Ann. Winton. a. 1216.

6 Ann. Wazer!. a. 1216.

7 18. a. 1216. The Ann. Winton. a. 1216 give a wrong date.

* Cf. Ann. Winton. a. 1216, and Hist, des Ducs, p. 173. Whichever version

be the correct one, both alike show that Ralf of Coggeshall (l.c.) is wrong in

attributing the fire to John himself.

* “Li grans castiaus le roi,” “le maistre castiel,” Hist. des Ducs, p. 173.

10 A.e.

I2 I6


and Louis gave the city into the custody of the count of

Nevers."

In the ten days of the siege Louis had gained something

besides Winchester. Before the castles surrendered “there

came thither to his will" four of “the greatest and most

powerful men in England of those who stood by the king”

—the earls of Warren, Arundel, Albemarle and Salisbury.”

Albemarle was a turncoat whose adhesion was too uncertain

to be of much value to either party;” but the other three

had hitherto been steadfast in their loyalty, and Salisbury,

moreover, was half-brother to the king." Still the invader

did not seem much nearer to the attainment of the crown

which he coveted. From Winchester he went to Porchester.”

and thence to Odiham; both places surrendered to him, but

the latter cost him a week's siege, though its garrison con-

sisted only of three knights and ten men-at-arms, who of

course marched out with the honours of war, “amid the

great admiration of the French.”" The conflicting claims

and mutual jealousies of his French and English followers

were already a source of trouble. The office of marshal of

the host, held by Adam de Beaumont, who was marshal to

Louis in France, was claimed as an hereditary right by

Earl William of Pembroke's eldest son ; Louis transferred it

to him “as one who durst not do otherwise, for if he gave it

him not, he deemed he should lose the hearts of the English.”

Young William the Marshal further claimed the castle of

Marlborough, which had been voluntarily surrendered to

Louis by Hugh de Neville. Louis, however, bestowed it

1. Cf. Hist. des Ducs, p. 174; Rot Pat. p. 188b, and Ann. Waverl. a. 1216.

* Hist, des Ducs, l.c. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 182, and W. Coventry, vol. ii.

P. *3; Qui tamen cito rediit,” W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 231.

* William of Armorica, Gesta Phil. Aug. c. 222, says that Salisbury changed

sides because “ei certo innotuit relatore” that during his own captivity in France

his royal brother had made an attempt on the honour of his wife (the well-known

Countess Ela). As, however, we shall see that Salisbury “went back" almost

as promptly as Albemarle, and the story seems quite unknown to the English

chroniclers, its truth may be doubted, though the mere fact that such a story

could be told of John with reference to his own sister-in-law illustrates the char-

acter for reckless wickedness which he had earned for himself.

1216

July 9

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 174.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 371. Odiham surrendered July 9, Ann. Waverl.

a. 1216.


on his own cousin, Robert of Dreux; whereat the young

Marshal “was very angry.” The French followers and

continental allies of Louis were already weary of an expedi-

tion which they doubtless saw would bring them little honour

and less gain. The count of Holland had taken the cross

and hurried home to prepare for his crusade. Soon after-

wards a number of the men of Artois departed to London

and thence took ship for their own land; and before they

could reach it they had to beat off “the English in their

boats” who attacked them at the mouth of the Thames.

Louis himself, after an unsuccessful attempt to make terms

with the legate, returned to London, seemingly about the

middle of July.

While Louis was in Hampshire, the barons whom he

had left in London, with some of his French troops, overran

the eastern counties; they sacked some of the towns,

ravaged the country, exacted “tenseries” everywhere, and

returned “laden with countless booty and spoils.”.” Another

party, under Gilbert de Gant and Robert de Ropesley, had

been charged by Louis to check the excursions whereby the

baronial castles in the neighbourhood of Nottingham and

Newark were being reduced to ashes, and the baronial lands

around them to subjection, by the garrisons of those two

royal fortresses. Gilbert and Robert took the city of Lincoln

and laid a tax on the whole of Lindsey; but Lincoln castle

was too strong for them, so they went on to invade Holland,

which they ravaged and likewise placed under tribute. A

third body of troops under Robert de Ros, Peter de Brus

and Richard de Percy was meanwhile conquering Yorkshire

for Louis; * and Alexander of Scotland had again set out

“with all his host, except the Scots from whom he took

money,” to renew the siege of Carlisle.* This, like all other

sieges of that famous fortress, proved a long and weari-

some business; Alexander, however, relieved its tediousness

by expeditions into the counties of Northumberland and

1 Hist, des Ducs, pp. 175-7.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 371, 378-81, Hist, des Ducs, p. 172, and

M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 182. -

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 379.

* Chron. Mailros, a. 1216.

T

I216


1216

Durham. He had no purpose now of conquering them for

himself; his aim was simply to join hands with the other

invader. The Scot king was the natural ally of the English

king's adversary.

Thus by the end of July the power of Louis extended

from the Channel to the Scottish border, but not without

some important breaks. The castles of the bishopric of

Durham were still held for John by Hugh de Balliol and

Philip de Ulecotes." The stranger's hold upon the south

coast was precarious in the extreme so long as Dover, the

“key of England,” defied him under Hubert de Burgh; and

Windsor at once threatened his hold upon London, and

barred his way to the Midlands and the West. These were

the districts in which John counted upon making good his

defence. Throughout June, while Louis was in Hampshire,

John was perambulating Wiltshire and Dorset, personally

seeing to the fortification and replenishing of the fortresses

in those two shires, planning schemes and giving orders for

the security of the royal castles in all parts of his realm,

and issuing instructions to their custodians how to act in

every possible contingency.” Diplomacy went hand in

hand with military precautions. Overtures were made to

Reginald de Braose, the deadliest of John's personal foes,

and one of those who had most influence on the western

border, for his return to allegiance at the price of the restora-

tion of his heritage.” Safe-conducts were offered to “all

who might choose to return to the king's service” through

the intervention of certain appointed persons.” A temporary

submission to the invader's demand of “tenserie” was

formally sanctioned in special cases where it was clear that

resistance would be ineffectual at the moment." Help

was again sought from over sea; on June 2 the town of

Bayonne was desired to send its galleys “for the annoyance

and confusion of our enemies.”" John's own movements

indicate that he, very naturally, expected Louis to follow up

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 379.

* Rot. Pat. pp. 184 b, 185 b, 186, 186 b, 187 b, 188, 193-5.

* Ib. p. 184. Cf. ib. p. 192.

* Ib. pp. 185, 187, 187 b, 188 b, 189, 189 b, etc.

* Ib. pp. 187, 188. * Ib. p. 185 b.


his conquest of Hampshire by an attack on the western

shires. It was obviously with this expectation, and with

the double purpose of putting the border in a state of

defence and securing for himself a refuge at need, that soon

after the middle of July he began to advance northward from

Sherborne to Bristol, Berkeley, Gloucester, Tewkesbury and

Hereford, reaching Leominster on the last day of the month."

He was at the same time negotiating with some of the

Welsh chieftains for their aid and support;” and on August

2 he was actually on Welsh soil, at Radnor. That night,

however, he was again in England, at Kingsmead; thence

he moved on to Clun, Shrewsbury and Whitchurch. On

the I Ith he turned southward again; he reached Bridge-

north on the 14th, and stayed there till the 16th, when he

went back to Worcester for one night; next day he was at

Gloucester.” A letter written on the 19th from Berkeley

shows that these movements were dictated by the belief that

Louis was preparing an attack upon Worcester and Here-

ford.* This fact illustrates one of the greatest difficulties of

medieval warfare, the difficulty of obtaining correct informa-

tion as to the whereabouts and movements of the adversary.

Louis, at the moment when John was thus anxiously look-

ing out for him in the west, had been for nearly four weeks

absorbed in the siege of Dover.

According to Matthew Paris, Philip Augustus had

taunted his son with not understanding his business as a

commander-in-chief, because he was attempting to conquer

England without first securing its key.” At any rate Louis,

soon after his return to London, perceived that his hold on

the country would never be assured till Dover and Windsor

were both in his hands. On July 25 he set out for

1 /tin. a. 18.

* Rot. Pat. p. 191 b ; Brut y Tywysogion, p. 293.

3 /tin. a. 18.

* Rot. Pat. p. 194. Worcester had been surrendered to the younger

William Marshal, for Louis, early in July, but was retaken on the 17th by the

earl of Chester and Falkes de Bréauté; Ann. Wigorn. a. 1215. The castle,

according to Ann. Dunst. a. 1215, was taken by “the old Marshal" at some

unspecified date. (In both the Worcester and the Dunstable Annals the history

of 1216 is placed under the year 1215.)

* M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 664.

I216


Dover," and a day or two later the counts of Dreux and

Nevers, with some English barons, laid siege to Windsor.” Of

this latter party the Flemish soldier-chronicler of the war says,

“Long were they there, and little did they gain.” ” They

in fact sat before the place for nearly two months in vain.”

The siege of Dover proved longer still, and for many weeks

bade fair to be equally unprofitable. Many of Louis's

followers went back over sea to their homes, “so that the

host dwindled marvellously.” ” On August 8, however, the

town—not the castle—of Carlisle surrendered to Alexander;"

and he at once began to move southward for the purpose

of joining Louis. Still a whole month elapsed before the

junction was effected. On his way the Scot king stopped

to besiege Barnard castle, held by Hugh de Balliol for John.

The siege appears to have been unsuccessful, and it cost the

life of one of the foremost leaders of the baronial party in

the north, Eustace de Vesci.” Some of the other northerners

were now helping Gilbert de Gant at the siege of Lincoln

castle. This time its constable, Dame Nicola de Haye.”

bought off her assailants, who thereupon united their forces

to those of Alexander.” The combined host seems to have

reached Kent about the second week in September.” Louis

went to meet Alexander at Canterbury, brought him back

to Dover,” and there received his homage for the lands

which he held of the English crown.”

º

1216

1 Liber de Antiq. Legibus, appendix, p. 202; Ann. Waverl. a. 1216. R.

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 38o, gives a wrong date.

* Hist. des Ducs, p. 177. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 182; R. Wendover, vol.

iii. p. 381, and W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 230.

3 Hist, des Ducs, l.c. * R. Coggeshall, l.c.

5 Hist, des Ducs, l.c. * Chron. Mailros, a. 1216.

7 Ib. ; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 382, 383.

8 Widow of John's old friend Gerard de Camville; see above, p. 31.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 230.

10 Hist, des Ducs, p. 179, relates John's advance to Reading, which took

place on September 6 (Itin. a. 18), and then gº on “Puis vint lirois d'Escoce,”

etc. Ib.

13 “Fecit [Alexander] ei [i.e. Ludovico] homagium de jure suo, quod de

rege Anglorum tenere debuit,” R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 382. “Lendemain

fist lirois son houmage à Looys de la tierre de Loonnois,” Hist, des Ducs, p.

179. (M. Francisque-Michel and M. Petit-Dutaillis render the last word

“Lennox”; does it not rather represent “Lothian"?) The Chronicle of

Melrose, a. 1216, says cautiously, “Alexander rex . . . humagium fecit dicto

Laodowico, ut dicitur.”


Meanwhile John had at last learned the truth as to his

adversary's movements, and was acting on the information.

Gathering a numerous host from the garrisons of the western

castles, which he now saw to be out of danger, and from his

old allies the Welsh," he marched up on September 2 from

Cirencester to Burford, spent the three following days at

Oxford, then struck across the Thames to Wallingford, and

on the 6th appeared at Reading. From the 8th to the 13th

he fixed his quarters at Sonning.” His advance looked as

if intended for the relief of Windsor; he did in fact approach

so near that castle that its besiegers “thought they were

going to have a battle.” His Welshmen “came by night to

shoot into the host, and gave them a great fright. They

were a long time armed to await the battle, but they did not

get it, for the king retired, I know not by what counsel,”

says the Flemish chronicler.” John had in truth never

intended to attack them ; his real “counsel ” is given us by

the English writers—his aim was the eastern counties, where

he purposed to intercept the Scot king on his homeward

journey, and to punish the local landholders and owners of

castles for their submission to the invader.” The relief of

Windsor he probably hoped to effect by other means, if

there is any truth in the assertion of some English chron-

iclers that the count of Nevers was secretly in his pay.” It

may have been for the purpose of communicating with

Nevers, as well as for that of frightening Nevers's companions

and reconnoitring the district, that the king lingered in

Berkshire. On September 15 he suddenly struck north-

ward from Walton-on-Thames to Aylesbury and Bedford;

next day he went on to Cambridge." The immediate con-

sequence was the relief of Windsor; its besiegers were no

sooner assured of his departure from their neighbourhood

than they struck their tents, set fire to their military engines,

and hurried in pursuit of him. They hoped to overtake

1. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 381, and Hist, des Ducs, pp. 178, 179.

* Itin. a. 18.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 179.

* Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 231, and R. Coggeshall, p. 182.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 382 ; M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 185;

and Ann. Dunst. a. 1215. ° Itin. a. 18.

I216


1216

him at Cambridge; but, warned by his scouts, he escaped

in time, on the night of September 17. A dexterous move-

ment southward to Clare and Hedingham threw his pursuers

off the track, and another rapid march brought him to

Stamford before they reached Cambridge." They avenged

their disappointment by harrying Cambridgeshire—this was

the second, if not the third, harrying which that unhappy

county had suffered within four months—carried their spoils

back to London, and then proceeded to join Louis at the

siege of Dover.”

The count of Nevers was immediately sent off again to

escort the Scot king safely homeward as far as Cambridge.”

Thence Alexander made his way towards Lincoln, which

Gilbert de Gant, with a few followers, had continued to

occupy after the other barons had abandoned the siege of

the castle." John meanwhile had gone from Stamford to

Rockingham; thence, on September 21,” he set out to begin

the work for which he had come from the west. The story

of that day and the next, as told by Matthew Paris—how

the king went first to Oundle and thence to the other

manors of the abbey of Peterborough, burning the houses

and barns; how he passed on to Crowland and bade Savaric

de Mauléon fire the abbey church and the village while he

himself stood at a distance to watch the blaze; how Savaric

yielded to the monks' prayer for mercy, and accepted from

them, as the price of their escape, a sum of money which he

brought back to John, and how the furious king, after over-

whelming his too placable lieutenant with abuse, helped with

his own hands to fire the harvest-fields, running up and

down amid the smoke and the flames till the whole territory

of S. 