 Even after its fall the garrison fought on until
 their last morsel of food was gone; then at last they surrendered on S.
 Andrew’s Day.[1123] The king set up a gallows in front of the army and
 declared he would hang them all; but he yielded to Savaric de Mauléon’s
 warning that if he hanged brave knights such as these, the barons would
 surely do the like to any friends of his who might fall into their
 hands, and that in view of such a prospect no man would remain in his
 service.[1124] On this he contented himself with sending the knights
 to prison, leaving the men-at-arms to ransom themselves as best they
 could, and hanging only a few cross-bowmen.[1125]
 
 Three times since the siege began the barons in London, or some of
 them, had opened negotiations with the king. On October 17 Richard
 of Argentan and others had a safe-conduct “to treat with us for
 peace between ourself and our barons”;[1126] on October 22 Roger de
 Jarpeville and Robert de Coleville had a safe-conduct till the 27th
 to treat with the king concerning peace between him and “the barons
 who may come with the Master of the Temple and the Prior of the
 Hospital”;[1127] and on November 9 a safe-conduct till the 12th was
 given to Earl Richard of Clare, Robert Fitz-Walter, Geoffrey de Say,
 and the mayor and two, three or four citizens of London, that they
 might go and speak with the bishop of Winchester, the earls of Warenne
 and Arundel, and Hubert de Burgh, “to treat of peace between ourself
 and our barons.”[1128] On the side of the barons these overtures were
 nothing but a cloak for the cowardice and incapacity which kept them
 from taking any active steps for the relief of their besieged comrades.
 They were all the while pushing on negotiations for bringing in a
 foreign power to aid them in their selfish scheme of revolution.
 
 One chronicler asserts that as long ago as the year 1210 some of the
 barons had contemplated driving John from his throne and setting up as
 king in his stead a man who, though born on foreign soil and engaged
 throughout his whole life in the service of foreign powers, had yet
 a claim to rank as one of themselves, and certainly not as the least
 distinguished among them--Simon, count of Montfort and titular earl
 of Leicester.[1129] To modern eyes the cruelties of the war against
 the Albigenses, in which Simon was the leader of the “crusading” host,
 have somewhat obscured the nobler aspects of a character which was not
 without a heroic side. It was indeed by a strange instinct that--if
 the Dunstable annalist’s tale be true--the chiefs of the English
 revolutionary party fixed their hopes for a moment on the father of
 that other Simon de Montfort, at that time still but a boy, who was
 one day to seal with his blood the work of England’s deliverance
 which they professed to have at heart, but which in their narrow and
 short-sighted selfishness they were alike unworthy and incapable of
 achieving. The instinct was at any rate a loftier one than that which
 guided them in their choice of a rival to John five years later. The
 scheme put forth by the group of barons in London in the summer of 1215
 for electing a new king “by the common consent of the whole realm” of
 course came to nothing; the magnates would have none of it, and the
 northern barons who had separated from the other malcontents before the
 sealing of the Charter had, as will be seen later, made an independent
 choice of their own. The mad little faction in London, headed now by
 Earl Geoffrey de Mandeville, acted by themselves and for themselves
 alone when they “chose for their lord” the eldest son of the king of
 France, “begging and praying him that he would come with a mighty arm
 to pluck them out of the hand of this tyrant.”[1130]
 
 Only one English chronicler gives or even pretends to give any hint
 of the grounds on which this choice was, either really or nominally,
 based. In no English writer of the time do we find any indication
 that the connexion of Louis of France with the reigning royal house
 of England, through his marriage with John’s sister’s daughter, had,
 or was supposed to have, anything to do with it. The claim to the
 English crown which Louis afterwards put forth on this ground seems to
 have been an idea of purely French origin, which not only had never
 suggested itself to any English mind, but, when it was suggested,
 failed to meet with general recognition even among Louis’s partizans in
 England. The intricate rules of succession, and especially of female
 succession, which it pre-supposed were as yet, when applied to the
 Crown at least, completely strange to English statesmen. Moreover, it
 is by no means clear that the barons who offered the Crown to Louis
 had any real intention of transferring it to him and his heirs for
 ever. Roger of Wendover tells us that “after hesitating for some time
 whom they should choose, they at length agreed upon this, that they
 would set over themselves Louis, the son of King Philip of France, and
 raise him up to be king of England. Their reason was that if through
 the agency of Louis and his father King John could be deprived of the
 host of foreign soldiers who surrounded him, most of whom were subjects
 of Louis[1131] or Philip, he, being without support from either side
 of the sea, would be left alone and unable to fight.”[1132] In other
 words, they wanted Louis as a tool wherewith to crush John; and to gain
 him for their tool they offered him the bribe of the crown, thinking
 that when their immediate purpose should be accomplished it would be
 time enough to consider whether the annexation of England to France
 would or would not really profit them better than to break faith with
 their new lord as they had broken it with their old one.
 
 The first direct overtures of the barons to Louis seem to have been
 made before the outbreak of hostilities, in September or October
 1215;[1133] and these overtures were renewed at some time after the
 commencement of the siege of Rochester, when the earls of Winchester
 and Hereford went over with a message from their comrades in London to
 Louis, that “if he would pack up his clothes and come, they would give
 him the kingdom and make him their lord.”[1134] These envoys were at
 once confronted by Philip with a letter which he had just received,
 purporting to come from the same barons and informing him that his
 son’s intervention was no longer needed, as peace had been made between
 them and their own sovereign. The earl of Winchester offered to pledge
 his head that the letter was forged by John.[1135] The French king
 accepted this assurance; but he was too wary to commit himself hastily
 to a scheme so full of perils and difficulties as that which the earls
 so lightly proposed, and he merely gave it a negative countenance by
 standing altogether aloof from their negotiations with his son. Louis
 promised that he would at once send to England as many knights as he
 could get, and would himself follow them at Easter. He then called his
 own vassals together at Hesdin, and at the end of November some hundred
 and forty of his knights with their followers--in all about seven
 thousand men--landed at the mouth of the Orwell[1136] and made their
 way to London, “where they were very well received and led a sumptuous
 life; only they were there in great discomfort because they ran short
 of wine and had only beer to drink, to which they were not accustomed.
 Thus they remained all the winter.”[1137]
 
 John spent the winter in other fashion. On November 28--two days
 before the surrender of Rochester--Tonbridge castle, which belonged
 to the rebel earl of Clare, had surrendered to Robert de Béthune,
 one of John’s Flemish allies, and on the same day the castle of
 Bedford yielded to Falkes de Bréauté. In each case the garrison had
 sent to their lord for help, and in each case no help had been given
 them.[1138] John left Rochester on December 6, marched through Essex
 and Surrey into Hampshire, and thence proceeded to Windsor.[1139]
 On the 20th he held a council at S. Albans.[1140] Two of his envoys
 had recently come back from Rome with a papal confirmation of the
 suspension of Archbishop Stephen.[1141] This was read to the convent
 assembled in the chapter-house, and committed to them for transmission
 to all cathedral and conventual churches throughout England. The king
 then retired with his counsellors into the cloister “to arrange how
 he might confound the magnates of England who were his enemies, and
 how he might find pay for the foreigners who were fighting under him.”
 He decided upon dividing his host into two bodies; one was placed
 under the command of Earl William of Salisbury, assisted by Falkes de
 Bréauté, Savaric de Mauléon, William Brewer, and a Brabantine captain
 known as Walter Buck, with orders to check the irruptions of the
 barons who were in London; of the other the king himself took the
 command, “intending to go through the northern provinces of England,
 and destroy with fire and sword everything that came in his way.”[1142]
 
 That same night {Dec. 20} John, with his division, moved on to
 Dunstable; before daybreak on the morrow he set out for Northampton,
 and by Christmas he was at Nottingham.[1143] All along his route he
 sent out parties in every direction to burn the houses of the hostile
 barons and seize their cattle and their goods; every obstacle that
 stood in his path was destroyed; and as if the day were not long enough
 to satiate his love of destruction, he would send men out at night
 to fire the hedges and the villages along his line of march, that he
 might rejoice his eyes with the damage done to his enemies; while the
 other question which had occupied his deliberations at S. Albans, the
 remuneration of his followers, was solved with the produce of the
 rapine in which they were not merely indulged but encouraged. Every
 human being, of whatever rank, sex or age, who crossed the path of
 this terrible host was seized, tortured, and put to heavy ransom. The
 constables of the baronial castles dared not trust to the protection of
 their walls; at the report of the king’s approach they fled, leaving
 their fortresses to be occupied by him and his troops.[1144] Thus, “not
 in the usual manner, but as one on the war-path,” he kept Christmas
 at Nottingham.[1145] On the following day {Dec. 26} he moved on to
 Langar, and thence, next morning, {Dec. 27} despatched a notice to the
 garrison of William of Aubigny’s castle of Belvoir that if they did
 not surrender at once, their lord should be starved to death. To this
 threat they yielded.[1146]
 
 [Sidenote: 1215–16]
 
 Meanwhile, the barons in London had made no use of the reinforcements
 sent to them by Louis. They seem to have despaired of overcoming John
 by any means short of an invasion headed by Louis in person with the
 whole forces of the French kingdom at his back. Towards the close of
 the year Saher de Quincy and Robert Fitz-Walter went on another embassy
 to Philip and Louis, “urgently imploring the father that he would send
 his son to reign in England, and the son that he would come thither to
 be crowned.” How or by whom he was to be crowned, when the only prelate
 competent to perform the rite was in exile and under suspension, and
 the rival sovereign was under the direct protection of the Pope, they
 did not explain. Philip refused to entertain their proposals without
 further security, and demanded “twenty-four hostages at least, of the
 noblest of the whole land.” The hostages were sent under the charge of
 the earls of Gloucester and Hereford. When they arrived, Louis began
 to prepare eagerly for his expedition; but there were still weighty
 reasons why, as an English chronicler says, “he himself could not
 hastily set out to undertake so arduous a matter.” So, “to raise the
 hopes of the barons and try their fidelity,”[1147] he sent his marshal
 and some others of his vassals with a second contingent, some three
 hundred knights and cross-bowmen and a proportionate number of foot
 soldiers, all of whom, together with the English earls, sailed up the
 Thames and arrived in London just after Epiphany 1216 {_c._ Jan. 8};
 he himself promising on oath that he would be at the coast, ready to
 cross, “with a great multitude of people,” at latest on the octave of
 S. Hilary, January 20.[1148]
 
 So, while John was pursuing his northward march, the barons sat still
 and waited. The southern division of John’s host meanwhile was far from
 idle. Between Christmas and the middle of January detachments of it
 overran the whole of Essex, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Cambridgeshire
 and Huntingdonshire, while the main body marched to S. Edmund’s, drove
 the insurgents who had taken refuge there to seek another shelter
 in the Isle of Ely, followed them thither, and sacked, burned and
 ravaged the patrimony of S. Etheldreda as they did every other place
 to which they came.[1149] Their leaders, before setting out, had
 charged the constables of Windsor, Hertford and Berkhamsted to keep
 a watch upon all who went into and out of London, and if possible
 to stop the supplies of the barons there. This latter charge either
 proved impossible to execute, or the constables deemed its execution
 impolitic, and deliberately preferred to let the king’s enemies in
 London ruin themselves by “lying there like delicate women, anxiously
 considering what variety of food and drink could be set before them
 to renew their wearied appetites.”[1150] The advance of Savaric de
 Mauléon on Colchester, on January 29, perhaps roused them at last, for
 a report reached him that they were hastening to relieve it, and caused
 him to retire towards S. Edmunds,[1151] probably to rejoin the other
 royalist leaders who had been doing the work of destruction at Ely. But
 the barons, still vainly waiting for their foreign ally who came not,
 made no further movement; and even when the royalists fired a suburb of
 London itself, and carried off “plunder of inestimable value,”[1152] no
 retaliation seems to have been attempted.
 
 [Sidenote: 1215]
 
 While the barons slumbered--as a chronicler says--the king was not
 asleep;[1153] he was wreaking his long-delayed vengeance on the north.
 The malcontents in the land beyond the Humber had been quicker than
 their southern comrades to recognize their need of foreign help in
 their struggle against John, and they had taken a short and easy way
 of obtaining it for themselves. No sooner had civil war broken out in
 England in the autumn of 1215 than the young Scottish king, Alexander,
 who owed his throne and almost his life to the timely help which John
 had given to his father four years before, marched into Northumberland
 and laid siege, on October 19, to Norham castle.
 
 [Sidenote: 1215–16]
 
 Three days later the Northumbrian barons did homage to him at Felton.
 No immediate results, indeed, followed from this new league; the
 garrison of Norham seem to have been as loyal as their castle was
 strong; at the end of forty days {Nov. 28} Alexander raised the siege
 and returned home,[1154] just as John was on the point of receiving the
 surrender of Rochester; and for more than a month no further movement
 took place in the north except an obscure rising at York.[1155] When
 at the opening of 1216 John entered Yorkshire, the terror of his
 march to Nottingham had gone before him and all thought of resistance
 was abandoned. He reached Pontefract on January 2; its constable
 “came there to his mercy.”[1156] He went on to “his city of York,”
 and “wrought all his will with it.”[1157] On January 7 and 8 he was
 at Darlington.[1158] The horrors wrought by his troops seem to have
 equalled, if not surpassed, those which the Scots had been wont to
 perpetrate in their raids upon Northumbria in their days of savage
 heathenism before the conversion of Malcolm Canmore.[1159] A few barons
 “submitted themselves to the mercy of the merciless one”; the rest
 “fled before his face.”[1160] From Darlington he seems to have advanced
 on the 8th to Durham; thence he was about to turn southward again, when
 he learned that Alexander had set fire to Newcastle-on-Tyne. Swearing
 “by God’s teeth” that he would “run the little sandy fox-cub to his
 earth,”[1161] John dashed forward to Newcastle; the place was indeed
 burnt, but Alexander had withdrawn into his own territory,[1162] and on
 the 11th the English refugees gathered round him in the chapter-house
 at Melrose and renewed their oath to him on the relics of the saints.
 John was on their track, burning and ravaging what little there was
 left to ravage--little enough, for the fugitives had set fire to their
 own fields and villages that he might get no benefit from them.[1163]
 On the day of the homage at Melrose John reached Alnwick.[1164]
 On the 14th he assaulted Berwick; town and castle were taken next
 day,[1165] and the population butchered, after horrible tortures, by
 his mercenaries. From Berwick he made, in the following week, a series
 of raids across the Tweed, and swept the country as far as Dunbar and
 Haddington, both of which he burned. At last, seeing that the “fox-cub”
 was not worth a longer chase and that there was more important work to
 be done elsewhere, he ordered Berwick to be burnt, fired with his own
 hand--so the Scottish story runs--the house in which he had himself
 been lodging,[1166] and on January 23 or 24 began to move southward.
 After stopping two days at Newcastle[1167] and granting a new charter
 to its citizens,[1168] he made his way slowly back through Yorkshire.
 When at the end of February he reached Fotheringay,[1169] all the
 castles in the shire save two were in his power and garrisoned by
 followers of his own, who were charged to hold the country and continue
 the work of destruction on the lands of the rebels wherever there was
 anything left to destroy.[1170] Alexander’s dreams of conquest, the
 Northumbrian barons’ dream of independence--if subjection to their
 country’s hereditary foe could be called independence--were alike at
 an end. Alexander, indeed, made a raid upon Carlisle as soon as John’s
 back was turned;[1171] but it was a mere raid which led to nothing.
 Far more significant is the string of safe-conducts which shows how
 throughout the winter and the spring the terror-stricken English rebels
 came crowding in to make their peace with John.[1172]
 
 [Sidenote: 1216]
 
 John had now regained the mastery over the whole eastern side of
 England, from the south coast to the Scottish border,[1173] except
 a few castles in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex. After spending a week
 in Bedfordshire,[1174] probably to concert measures with Falkes de
 Bréauté, he marched into East Anglia. On March 12 he was at the gates
 of Roger Bigod’s castle of Framlingham; it surrendered at once.[1175]
 Next day he moved on to Ipswich; on the 14th he laid siege to
 Colchester.[1176] Here the garrison had been reinforced by a detachment
 of Louis’s Frenchmen, who agreed to surrender on condition that they
 should be suffered to march out free and their English comrades held
 to ransom. John, however, broke his promise to the Englishmen and put
 them in chains. The Frenchmen on reaching London were accused by the
 barons of having betrayed their comrades by making separate terms for
 themselves; they were arrested and even threatened with death, but
 it was finally determined to keep them in custody till Louis should
 arrive.[1177] On the 25th John proceeded to Hedingham, which belonged
 to the earl of Oxford, Robert de Vere; three days later it surrendered,
 and the earl himself “came there to the king’s mercy, and swore that
 he would thenceforth serve him loyally.” Robert’s oath was soon
 broken;[1178] but his submission, insincere though it was, indicates
 that the barons were losing heart. So, too, does an application made at
 the same time by the earl of Clare and his son for a safe-conduct to
 and from the king’s court.[1179] A yet more important result of John’s
 recent campaign was the supply of money which he had acquired by the
 plunder of his enemies. This enabled him during his stay at Hedingham
 to satisfy his mercenaries by a general distribution of pay and gifts.
 Thus secured against the risk of their desertion, he prepared to march
 upon London.[1180]
 
 [Sidenote: 1215–16]
 
 A third body of troops sent by Louis had arrived in London at the end
 of February,[1181] and a letter had been received from Louis himself,
 announcing that “by God’s grace” he would “most certainly” be at Calais
 ready to cross on Easter Day, April 10.[1182] Encouraged on the one
 hand by this assurance, on the other the Londoners had been stirred
 into a mood of dangerous defiance by tidings from Rome. On December 16,
 1215, the Pope renewed his condemnation of the barons in such a manner
 that it could no longer remain what circumstances had made it hitherto,
 a dead letter. He excommunicated the rebels, this time not merely in
 general terms, but mentioning thirty-one of them by name; he also
 placed the city of London under interdict, and he appointed the abbot
 of Abingdon and two other commissioners to execute this mandate.[1183]
 It seems to have reached England about the end of February 1216.[1184]
 The commissioners sent it to all the cathedral and conventual churches
 for immediate publication, and it was soon published everywhere except
 in London. There the clergy of S. Paul’s, the barons and the citizens
 all alike rejected it and appealed against it, declaring that it had
 been obtained by “false suggestions, and was therefore of no account,
 more especially as the ordering of lay affairs pertained not to the
 Pope.”[1185] This last assertion seems ridiculous in the mouths of the
 barons, who scarce twelve months before had professed pride in having
 compelled the king to surrender to the Pope the temporal overlordship
 of England. It was in a spirit of mingled rage at the downfall of the
 expectations which they had once founded upon that surrender, and
 revived hope of speedy help from France, that the revolutionists who
 held the capital met the king’s threat of attack. The citizens opened
 their gates and arrayed themselves “ready to go forth and fight with
 him if he should approach within ten leagues of the city.”[1186]
 Advancing slowly and cautiously, he reached Enfield on the last day of
 March;[1187] on the following night he seems to have slept at Waltham
 Abbey, “seven little English leagues from London.”[1188] But he came no
 nearer. Savaric de Mauléon, venturing on a closer approach, was caught
 at unawares and barely escaped with heavy loss of men and with a wound
 of which he all but died; a band of “pirates” who attempted to block
 the Thames were all either slain, drowned or captured by the Londoners;
 and evil tidings came from the north how the rebels there had risen
 anew, laid siege to York, and pressed it so hard that the citizens had
 been compelled to purchase for a thousand marks a truce till Trinity
 Sunday.[1189] From Enfield the king passed round by Berkhamsted to
 Windsor and Reading, and thence went south into Hampshire.[1190]
 
 Of the northern rising we hear no more, but it seems to have proved
 a failure, for before April 12 three of the chief northern barons,
 Eustace de Vesci, Robert de Ros and Peter de Brus, offered to return to
 the king’s service on one condition--that he would allow them to do so
 without a fine. John’s answer was as politic as it was dignified. “What
 we desire to have from our barons,” he wrote, “is not so much money as
 their good and faithful service”; and he sent the three petitioners a
 safe-conduct to come and speak with him on their own terms.[1191] On
 the previous day he had given orders that the mayor of York should be
 “competently provided” out of the lands of the king’s enemies “for his
 good and faithful service which he did to the king,”[1192] no doubt in
 the defence of the city during the recent siege. The mayor’s loyalty
 and the king’s promptitude in rewarding it illustrate a feature of
 John’s home policy which is traceable through all the vicissitudes of
 his career: his interest in the towns and the trading classes, and
 his constant endeavours to cultivate their friendship. All the while
 that he was harrying the open country, burning villages and plundering
 castles, he was making careful provision for the furtherance of
 trade, the security of travelling merchants[1193] and the preservation
 of foreign commerce from disturbance or interruption. With a French
 invasion close at hand, he was still issuing safe-conducts to French
 merchants in London and elsewhere.[1194] For this, indeed, there
 may have been a political reason; John was anxious to keep on good
 terms with France in order to counterwork the schemes of the barons
 in that quarter. He had lately sent an embassy to try whether Philip
 Augustus could by any means be induced to forbid his son’s proposed
 expedition.[1195] One of the envoys at least, William the Marshal,
 was back by Easter,[1196] the day which Louis had fixed for his own
 departure. That day passed and Louis came not--hindered, it seems,
 by contrary winds.[1197] About this time John sent a letter to Louis
 himself, signifying his willingness to amend any injury which Louis
 might have received at his hands;[1198] and on April 28 he wrote to
 the guardians of the truce in France proposing that they should hold a
 meeting with his proctors for the settlement of all disputes which had
 arisen from infractions of the truce.[1199]
 
 [Sidenote: 1216]
 
 By that time the projected expedition of Louis had assumed an aspect
 very different from that which it had worn when first suggested by the
 English barons in the previous autumn. Philip as well as Louis was
 naturally tempted by what looked like a golden opportunity for annexing
 England to France; but he was held back by the dread of offending
 the Pope, who had no sooner heard of the scheme than he despatched a
 legate, Gualo, with instructions to proceed to France and England for
 the express purpose of forbidding it. Philip saw that to make his son’s
 project tolerable in the Pope’s eyes, and therefore safe in those of
 his own feudataries, he must invent for it some more plausible excuse
 than the flimsy pretence of election by the excommunicate English
 barons. He had made out an elaborate case in behalf of Louis and
 planned his own course of action with characteristic wariness and
 skill, by the time that Gualo arrived in the spring of 1216. On April
 25 the legate was publicly received at Melun[1200] by the French king,
 to whom he presented the Pope’s letters desiring that Philip would
 not permit his son to invade England or to molest the English king in
 any way, but rather that he would protect and assist John as a vassal
 of the Roman Church. Philip answered at once: “The realm of England
 never was S. Peter’s patrimony; it is not so now, and never shall be.
 John was convicted long ago of treason against his brother Richard,
 and condemned by the judgement of Richard’s court; therefore John was
 never rightfully king, and had no power to surrender the kingdom.
 Moreover, if he ever was rightfully king, he afterwards forfeited his
 right to the crown by the murder of Arthur, for which he was condemned
 in our court. And in any case no king or prince can give away his
 realm without the consent of his barons, who are bound to defend it.”
 This last proposition was loudly applauded by the French magnates.
 Next day a second meeting took place. Louis, according to a previous
 arrangement with his father, came in after the rest of the assembly and
 seated himself by his father’s side, scowling at the legate. Gualo,
 without appearing to notice his discourtesy, besought him “not to go
 to England to invade or seize the patrimony of the Roman Church,” and
 again begged Philip to forbid his doing so. “I have always been devoted
 and faithful,” answered Philip, “to the Pope and the Roman Church, and
 by my counsel and help my son will not now attempt aught against them;
 yet if Louis claims to have any rights in the realm of England, let him
 be heard, and let justice be done.” On this a knight whom Louis had
 appointed as his proctor rose and set forth the case thus: “My Lord
 King, it is well known that John, who is called king of England, was
 in your court by sentence of his peers condemned to death for treason
 against his nephew Arthur, whom he had slain with his own hands, and
 that he was afterwards rejected by the barons of England from reigning
 over them by reason of the many murders and other enormities which he
 had committed there; wherefore they began war against him, that they
 might drive him from the throne without hope of restoration. Moreover,
 the said king, without the consent of his magnates, made over the realm
 of England to the Pope and the Roman Church, to receive it back from
 them for an annual tribute of a thousand marks. Although he could not
 give the crown of England to any one without consent of the barons, yet
 he could resign it; and when he resigned it he ceased to be king, and
 the throne was vacant. Now a vacant throne ought not to be filled save
 by consent of the barons; wherefore the barons elected the Lord Louis
 on account of his wife, whose mother, the queen of Castille, was the
 sole survivor of all the brothers and sisters of the English king.”
 
 With this ingeniously-woven tissue of perverted truths and dressed-up
 lies it was obviously impossible for Gualo to deal on the spur of the
 moment. He evaded the point at issue by pointing out that John had
 taken the cross, and was therefore entitled to be left unmolested
 till his vow of crusade was fulfilled. Louis’s proctor retorted that
 John had made war upon Louis both before and after taking the cross,
 and that Louis was therefore justified in retaliating. Gualo, without
 further argument, again forbade Louis to invade England, and his father
 to suffer him to do so, under pain of excommunication. Louis turned
 to his father: “Sire, although I am your liegeman for the fief which
 you have given me on this side of the sea, yet concerning the realm
 of England it appertaineth not to you to decree anything; wherefore
 I submit me to the judgement of my peers whether you ought to forbid
 me to prosecute my right, and especially a right concerning which you
 cannot yourself do me justice. I beseech you therefore not to hinder
 me, since for my wife’s heritage I will fight, if need be, even unto
 death.” With these words he left the assembly. Gualo made no remark,
 but simply asked the king for a safe-conduct to the sea, that he
 might proceed on his mission to England. “I will gladly give you a
 safe-conduct through my own domains,” answered Philip; “but should you
 chance to fall into the hands of any of my son’s men who are guarding
 the coast, blame me not if evil befall you.” The legate departed in a
 rage. As soon as he was gone, Louis returned, asked and received his
 father’s blessing on his enterprize, despatched messengers to Rome to
 lay his case before the Pope, and himself went to collect his forces at
 Calais.[1201]
 
 On April 14 John had ordered twenty-one coast towns to send all
 their ships to the mouth of the Thames.[1202] On the 17th he bade
 the sheriffs throughout England make a proclamation calling upon all
 persons who had been in arms against the king to join him within a
 month after the close of Easter (April 24), on pain of forfeiture for
 ever.[1203] On the 20th he returned to Windsor; thence he went through
 Surrey back to Rochester;[1204] on the 25th--the day of the council
 at Melun--he issued from Canterbury orders to the soldiers then at
 Rochester to follow him immediately “wheresoever he might be.”[1205]
 He reached Canterbury that night, Dover on the morrow, and spent the
 next three weeks flitting up and down along the coast of Kent,[1206]
 watching for the arrival of both Gualo and Louis, and superintending
 the gathering of the fleet and the preparation of the coast towns for
 defence. The Cinque Ports were again pledged, by oaths and hostages,
 to his service. Yarmouth, Lynn, Dunwich and other sea-ports sent their
 ships to the muster[1207] at Dover. As soon as it was complete, the
 king intended to sail with his whole fleet to Calais and block up Louis
 in the harbour, “for he well knew,” says a contemporary, “that the
 little vessels which Louis had could not defend themselves against his
 ships, which were so large; one of his ships was well worth four of
 those of Louis.” But towards evening on May 18 a storm arose and swept
 over the fleet as it lay off Dover, and by the morning the ships were
 so broken and scattered that all hope of bringing them together again
 was lost.[1208] On the night of the 20th Louis set sail from Calais.
 Next morning the watchmen on the shore of Thanet saw some of his ships
 in the distance; they sent word to the king, who was at Canterbury,
 on the point of setting out to meet the legate, of whose arrival at
 Romney he had just been apprised. He told the messengers from Thanet
 that what had been seen were not the enemy’s ships, but some of his own
 which the storm had driven out to sea. But his words were only spoken
 to encourage his followers; in his heart he knew that the watchmen were
 not mistaken. He seems to have ridden only a few miles towards Romney
 when he met Gualo, clad in his scarlet robes as cardinal, and mounted
 on a white palfrey, as beseemed the representative of the Pope. King
 and legate dismounted and embraced. John at once told Gualo that Louis
 had arrived; Gualo pronounced the invader excommunicate, and rode with
 John into Canterbury.[1209]
 
 Louis meanwhile had landed at Stonor almost alone; the greater part
 of his fleet did not even come in sight till the next day, Sunday,
 May 22. John had now hurried to Sandwich; thence he saw with his own
 eyes the approach of the hostile fleet as it sailed past the mouth of
 Pegwell Bay. To prevent its reaching the shore was impossible; the
 only question was whether he should encounter the French host as soon
 as it had disembarked and stake everything upon a pitched battle. The
 trumpets were sounded, the troops arrayed; but as he rode up and down
 along the shore surveying their ranks his heart sank within him.[1210]
 They were, almost to a man, mercenaries and foreigners, most of them
 born subjects of the French king; what if, when the fight was at the
 hottest, they should go over in a body to their fellow-countrymen
 and their own king’s son? The risk was too grave to be faced; it
 was better to withdraw than to court an encounter so likely to prove
 fatal.[1211] Such was the counsel given to John by one of the few
 Englishmen still at his side, the wisest and truest of them all,
 William the Marshal.[1212] For a while John hesitated; then, as was
 his wont in moments of disappointment and distress, he stole away in
 silence, and had galloped a league on the road to Dover before the
 greater part of his men knew that he was gone.[1213] Leaving Dover
 under the charge of Hubert de Burgh, with a strong garrison and ample
 provisions,[1214] and appointing the earl of Warren warden of the
 Cinque Ports,[1215] he made his way through Sussex to Winchester,
 where he remained watching the course of events during the next ten
 days.[1216]
 
 The first act of Louis after landing his troops was to issue a
 manifesto to the English clergy, setting forth, in somewhat more
 blunt terms than he had ventured to use in presence of the legate
 at Melun, his pretensions to the English Crown, and exhorting those
 whom he addressed not to be persuaded into thwarting his endeavours
 “for the good of the English Church and realm” by anything that they
 might hear from Gualo, whom he represented as having no just grounds
 for opposition to him, and as having been brought to England “by
 the suggestions and bribes” of John.[1217] He then, after seizing
 a few English ships which had put in at Sandwich after the storm,
 and plundering the town, marched upon Canterbury. The citizens
 admitted him without resistance;[1218] Gualo fled from his lodgings
 in S. Augustine’s abbey; the abbot, who was John’s foster-brother,
 alone refused all submission to the invader.[1219] From Canterbury
 Louis proceeded to Rochester, where he was joined by his men from
 London.[1220] The mighty fortress which had cost John a siege of nearly
 two months surrendered to Louis in less than a week, on Whit Monday,
 May 30.[1221] Already the forebodings of the king and the Marshal were
 more than justified; John’s mercenaries were deserting, and not only
 those barons who had been recently preparing, or pretending to prepare,
 to return to their allegiance, but even many of those who had hitherto
 seemed loyal to him, now joined the leaders of the revolution in doing
 homage to the invader.[1222] On Whitsun Eve (May 28) Gualo had rejoined
 the king at Winchester,[1223] after issuing a citation to the English
 bishops and clergy to meet him there “in aid of the king and the
 kingdom.” On Whit Sunday, in their presence, he excommunicated Louis by
 name, together with all his followers and adherents, whose lands, as
 well as the city of London, he laid under interdict.[1224] The sentence
 was disregarded; on June 2 Louis entered London;[1225] the citizens
 welcomed him joyously, and the canons of S. Paul’s received him with
 a procession in their cathedral church.[1226] Next day he received
 the homage of the barons and citizens, headed respectively by Robert
 Fitz-Walter and the mayor, William Hardel.[1227] He then swore on the
 Gospels “that he would restore to all of them their good laws and their
 lost heritages,” and wrote to the king of Scots and all the English
 magnates who had not yet joined him “bidding them either come and do
 him homage, or quit the realm of England without delay.”[1228]
 
 On June 6 Louis started from London[1229] to seek out his rival at
 Winchester,[1230] but he was already too late; John had quitted
 Winchester the day before,[1231] leaving it, with its two castles,
 under the command of Savaric de Mauléon.[1232] Louis’s first day’s
 march from London brought him to Reigate, which he entered without
 opposition, the earl of Warren having withdrawn his garrison from the
 castle. The royal castle of Guildford surrendered on the 8th, Farnham,
 which belonged to the see of Canterbury, on the 10th.[1233] On the
 14th Louis reached Winchester.[1234] Savaric de Mauléon was, it seems,
 under orders to rejoin the king when he saw the enemy approaching the
 city and had completed his preparations for its defence. With the
 idea, doubtless, of checking the entrance of the foe, he, or some of
 his followers, set fire to the suburb before he left it. Unluckily
 the flames spread into the city and laid half of it in ashes. Defence
 became impossible, and the French marched in to take undisputed
 possession.[1235] John and Savaric had, however, left a strong garrison
 in the “chief castle”[1236] at the west end of the city; the bishop’s
 stronghold of Wolvesey too, at the eastern end, was well provided with
 defenders, among whom was one of the king’s sons, a young squire named
 Oliver.[1237] For ten days Louis plied his engines against the “chief
 castle”; then on June 24 Savaric returned with a licence from the king
 to negotiate for its surrender and that of Wolvesey. The garrisons were
 suffered to withdraw, and Louis gave the city into the custody of the
 count of Nevers.[1238]
 
 In the ten days of the siege Louis had gained something besides
 Winchester. Before the castles surrendered “there came thither to
 his will” four of “the greatest and most powerful men in England of
 those who stood by the king”--the earls of Warren, Arundel, Albemarle
 and Salisbury.[1239] Albemarle was a turncoat whose adhesion was too
 uncertain to be of much value to either party;[1240] but the other
 three had hitherto been steadfast in their loyalty, and Salisbury,
 moreover, was half-brother to the king.[1241] Still the invader did
 not seem much nearer to the attainment of the crown which he coveted.
 From Winchester he went to Porchester,[1242] and thence to Odiham;
 both places surrendered to him, but the latter cost him a week’s
 siege, though its garrison consisted only of three knights and ten
 men-at-arms {July 9}, who of course marched out with the honours of
 war, “amid the great admiration of the French.”[1243] The conflicting
 claims and mutual jealousies of his French and English followers were
 already a source of trouble. The office of marshal of the host, held
 by Adam de Beaumont, who was marshal to Louis in France, was claimed
 as an hereditary right by Earl William of Pembroke’s eldest son; Louis
 transferred it to him “as one who durst not do otherwise, for if he
 gave it him not, he deemed he should lose the hearts of the English.”
 Young William the Marshal further claimed the castle of Marlborough,
 which had been voluntarily surrendered to Louis by Hugh de Neville.
 Louis, however, bestowed it on his own cousin, Robert of Dreux;
 whereat the young Marshal “was very angry.” The French followers and
 continental allies of Louis were already weary of an expedition which
 they doubtless saw would bring them little honour and less gain. The
 count of Holland had taken the cross and hurried home to prepare for
 his crusade. Soon afterwards a number of the men of Artois departed to
 London and thence took ship for their own land; and before they could
 reach it they had to beat off “the English in their boats” who attacked
 them at the mouth of the Thames. Louis himself, after an unsuccessful
 attempt to make terms with the legate, returned to London,[1244]
 seemingly about the middle of July.
 
 While Louis was in Hampshire, the barons whom he had left in London,
 with some of his French troops, overran the eastern counties; they
 sacked some of the towns, ravaged the country, exacted “tenseries”
 everywhere, and returned “laden with countless booty and spoils.”[1245]
 Another party, under Gilbert de Gant and Robert de Ropesley, had been
 charged by Louis to check the excursions whereby the baronial castles
 in the neighbourhood of Nottingham and Newark were being reduced
 to ashes, and the baronial lands around them to subjection, by the
 garrisons of those two royal fortresses. Gilbert and Robert took the
 city of Lincoln and laid a tax on the whole of Lindsey; but Lincoln
 castle was too strong for them, so they went on to invade Holland,
 which they ravaged and likewise placed under tribute. A third body
 of troops under Robert de Ros, Peter de Brus and Richard de Percy
 was meanwhile conquering Yorkshire for Louis;[1246] and Alexander of
 Scotland had again set out “with all his host, except the Scots from
 whom he took money,” to renew the siege of Carlisle.[1247] This, like
 all other sieges of that famous fortress, proved a long and wearisome
 business; Alexander, however, relieved its tediousness by expeditions
 into the counties of Northumberland and Durham. He had no purpose now
 of conquering them for himself; his aim was simply to join hands with
 the other invader. The Scot king was the natural ally of the English
 king’s adversary.
 
 Thus by the end of July the power of Louis extended from the Channel
 to the Scottish border, but not without some important breaks. The
 castles of the bishopric of Durham were still held for John by Hugh
 de Balliol and Philip de Ulecotes.[1248] The stranger’s hold upon the
 south coast was precarious in the extreme so long as Dover, the “key
 of England,” defied him under Hubert de Burgh; and Windsor at once
 threatened his hold upon London, and barred his way to the Midlands
 and the West. These were the districts in which John counted upon
 making good his defence. Throughout June, while Louis was in Hampshire,
 John was perambulating Wiltshire and Dorset, personally seeing to
 the fortification and replenishing of the fortresses in those two
 shires, planning schemes and giving orders for the security of the
 royal castles in all parts of his realm, and issuing instructions
 to their custodians how to act in every possible contingency.[1249]
 Diplomacy went hand in hand with military precautions. Overtures
 were made to Reginald de Braose, the deadliest of John’s personal
 foes, and one of those who had most influence on the western border,
 for his return to allegiance at the price of the restoration of his
 heritage.[1250] Safe-conducts were offered to “all who might choose
 to return to the king’s service” through the intervention of certain
 appointed persons.[1251] A temporary submission to the invader’s demand
 of “tenserie” was formally sanctioned in special cases where it was
 clear that resistance would be ineffectual at the moment.[1252] Help
 was again sought from over sea; on June 2 the town of Bayonne was
 desired to send its galleys “for the annoyance and confusion of our
 enemies.”[1253] John’s own movements indicate that he, very naturally,
 expected Louis to follow up his conquest of Hampshire by an attack on
 the western shires. It was obviously with this expectation, and with
 the double purpose of putting the border in a state of defence and
 securing for himself a refuge at need, that soon after the middle of
 July he began to advance northward from Sherborne to Bristol, Berkeley,
 Gloucester, Tewkesbury and Hereford, reaching Leominster on the last
 day of the month.[1254] He was at the same time negotiating with some
 of the Welsh chieftains for their aid and support;[1255] and on August
 2 he was actually on Welsh soil, at Radnor. That night, however, he was
 again in England, at Kingsmead; thence he moved on to Clun, Shrewsbury
 and Whitchurch. On the 11th he turned southward again; he reached
 Bridgenorth on the 14th, and stayed there till the 16th, when he went
 back to Worcester for one night; next day he was at Gloucester.[1256]
 A letter written on the 19th from Berkeley shows that these movements
 were dictated by the belief that Louis was preparing an attack upon
 Worcester and Hereford.[1257] This fact illustrates one of the greatest
 difficulties of medieval warfare, the difficulty of obtaining correct
 information as to the whereabouts and movements of the adversary.
 Louis, at the moment when John was thus anxiously looking out for him
 in the west, had been for nearly four weeks absorbed in the siege of
 Dover.
 
 According to Matthew Paris, Philip Augustus had taunted his son with
 not understanding his business as a commander-in-chief, because he was
 attempting to conquer England without first securing its key.[1258]
 At any rate Louis, soon after his return to London, perceived that
 his hold on the country would never be assured till Dover and Windsor
 were both in his hands. On July 25 he set out for Dover,[1259] and
 a day or two later the counts of Dreux and Nevers, with some English
 barons, laid siege to Windsor.[1260] Of this latter party the Flemish
 soldier-chronicler of the war says, “Long were they there, and little
 did they gain.”[1261] They in fact sat before the place for nearly
 two months in vain.[1262] The siege of Dover proved longer still, and
 for many weeks bade fair to be equally unprofitable. Many of Louis’s
 followers went back over sea to their homes, “so that the host dwindled
 marvellously.”[1263] On August 8, however, the town--not the castle--of
 Carlisle surrendered to Alexander;[1264] and he at once began to move
 southward for the purpose of joining Louis. Still a whole month elapsed
 before the junction was effected. On his way the Scot king stopped to
 besiege Barnard castle, held by Hugh de Balliol for John. The siege
 appears to have been unsuccessful, and it cost the life of one of
 the foremost leaders of the baronial party in the north, Eustace de
 Vesci.[1265] Some of the other northerners were now helping Gilbert
 de Gant at the siege of Lincoln castle. This time its constable, Dame
 Nicola de Haye,[1266] bought off her assailants, who thereupon united
 their forces to those of Alexander.[1267] The combined host seems to
 have reached Kent about the second week in September.[1268] Louis went
 to meet Alexander at Canterbury, brought him back to Dover,[1269] and
 there received his homage for the lands which he held of the English
 crown.[1270]
 
 Meanwhile John had at last learned the truth as to his adversary’s
 movements, and was acting on the information. Gathering a numerous
 host from the garrisons of the western castles, which he now saw to be
 out of danger, and from his old allies the Welsh,[1271] he marched up
 on September 2 from Cirencester to Burford, spent the three following
 days at Oxford, then struck across the Thames to Wallingford, and on
 the 6th appeared at Reading. From the 8th to the 13th he fixed his
 quarters at Sonning.[1272] His advance looked as if intended for the
 relief of Windsor; he did in fact approach so near that castle that
 its besiegers “thought they were going to have a battle.” His Welshmen
 “came by night to shoot into the host, and gave them a great fright.
 They were a long time armed to await the battle, but they did not get
 it, for the king retired, I know not by what counsel,” says the Flemish
 chronicler.[1273] John had in truth never intended to attack them;
 his real “counsel” is given us by the English writers--his aim was
 the eastern counties, where he purposed to intercept the Scot king on
 his homeward journey, and to punish the local landholders and owners
 of castles for their submission to the invader.[1274] The relief of
 Windsor he probably hoped to effect by other means, if there is any
 truth in the assertion of some English chroniclers that the count of
 Nevers was secretly in his pay.[1275] It may have been for the purpose
 of communicating with Nevers, as well as for that of frightening
 Nevers’s companions and reconnoitring the district, that the king
 lingered in Berkshire. On September 15 he suddenly struck northward
 from Walton-on-Thames to Aylesbury and Bedford; next day he went on to
 Cambridge.[1276] The immediate consequence was the relief of Windsor;
 its besiegers were no sooner assured of his departure from their
 neighbourhood than they struck their tents, set fire to their military
 engines, and hurried in pursuit of him. They hoped to overtake him at
 Cambridge; but, warned by his scouts, he escaped in time, on the night
 of September 17. A dexterous movement southward to Clare and Hedingham
 threw his pursuers off the track, and another rapid march brought him
 to Stamford before they reached Cambridge.[1277] They avenged their
 disappointment by harrying Cambridgeshire--this was the second, if not
 the third, harrying which that unhappy county had suffered within four
 months--carried their spoils back to London, and then proceeded to join
 Louis at the siege of Dover.[1278]
 
 The count of Nevers was immediately sent off again to escort the Scot
 king safely homeward as far as Cambridge.[1279] Thence Alexander made
 his way towards Lincoln, which Gilbert de Gant, with a few followers,
 had continued to occupy after the other barons had abandoned the
 siege of the castle.[1280] John meanwhile had gone from Stamford to
 Rockingham; thence, on September 21,[1281] he set out to begin the
 work for which he had come from the west. The story of that day and
 the next, as told by Matthew Paris--how the king went first to Oundle
 and thence to the other manors of the abbey of Peterborough, burning
 the houses and barns; how he passed on to Crowland and bade Savaric de
 Mauléon fire the abbey church and the village while he himself stood
 at a distance to watch the blaze; how Savaric yielded to the monks’
 prayer for mercy, and accepted from them, as the price of their escape,
 a sum of money which he brought back to John, and how the furious king,
 after overwhelming his too placable lieutenant with abuse, helped with
 his own hands to fire the harvest-fields, running up and down amid
 the smoke and the flames till the whole territory of S.