Their warrant was a letter

from the king which Walter had brought from Messina, and

in which the subordinate justiciars were bidden to obey

Walter's guidance in all things. The party then returned

to Reading; there, next day (Sunday, October 6), the

bishops among them excommunicated Longchamp and his

adherents; at night a message was sent to him, bidding him

appear at the bridge next morning without fail; and this he

promised to do." John and his friends were resolved to

make sure of their game this time. On the Monday

morning they took care to be first at the bridge; but

instead of waiting for the chancellor, the heads of the party

rode forward along the Windsor road as if to meet him, and

1 191

* Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. pp. 394-7.

* Ib. p. 397; R. Devizes, p. 413. Cf. Gesta Ric. p. 212. One of the

summons is given in R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 98.

* Gir. Cambr. l.c.

* Iº. vol. iv. pp. 398-402. For date see R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 98.


sent their men-at-arms and servants towards London by way

of Staines. Tidings of these movements reached William

just after he had set out from Windsor. He at once turned

back and rode towards London with all speed, and reached

the junction of the two roads at the same time as the men-

at-arms of John's party. A skirmish took place in which

John's justiciar, Roger de Planes, was mortally wounded."

While the chancellor made his way into the Tower, John

and the barons were following him to London. Next

morning (Tuesday, October 8) they assembled at S. Paul's,

renewed their resolution to depose the chancellor, and, in

the king's name, granted to the Londoners their coveted

“commune”;” whereupon the citizens joined unreservedly

with them in voting the deposition of Longchamp and the

appointment of Walter of Rouen as chief justiciar in his

stead.” According to one account, the assembly went still

further, and proposed to make John “chief governor of the

whole kingdom,” with control of all the royal castles except

three which were to be left to the chancellor.” As a token

that all this was done “for the safety of the realm,” every

man present, John first of all, renewed his oath of fealty to

the king ; and this ceremony was followed by a second oath

of fidelity taken by all the rest to John himself, “saving their

fealty” [to the king], together with a promise that they

would acknowledge him as king if Richard should die

without issue.”

The barons, the bishops, the justiciars, all London, all

England, save a handful of Longchamp's own relatives,

personal friends and followers, was on John's side; Long-

champ himself, besieged in the Tower by overwhelming

forces, could not possibly hold it for more than a day or

two, and there was no hope of relief. There was, however,

still one chance of escape from all his difficulties, John

* Cf. Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. pp. 402-5; R. Devizes, pp. 413, 414; R. Diceto,

vol. ii. p. 99; Gesta Ric, p. 212, and W. Newb. l. iv. c. 17.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. p. 405; Gesta Ric. pp. 213, 214; R. Diceto, l.c.; R.

Devizes, pp. 416, 417.

* Gesta Ric. pp. 213, 214.

* R. Devizes, p. 415.

* Gesta Ric. p. 214. Cf. R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 97.

I 19 I

4.


I 191

Oct. II

might be bribed. The project seemed a desperate one,

for William had already tried it without success, two

days before; * yet he tried it again on the Wednesday,

and this time he all but succeeded. “By promising

him much and giving him not a little, the chancellor

so nearly turned the count of Mortain from his purpose

that he was ready to withdraw from the city, leaving

the business unfinished, had not the bishops of Coventry

and York recalled him by their entreaties and argu-

ments.”* Next day the chancellor submitted. On the

Friday he gave up the keys of the Tower and of

Windsor; within another fortnight he was reduced to

surrender all the other royal castles except the three

which had been nominally reserved to him, Dover, Cam-

bridge, and Hereford.” Hereupon John ordered him to

be released, and allowed him to sail on October 29 for

France.*

The truth of Longchamp's assertion that John was

“endeavouring to usurp the kingdom for himself” was soon

made evident. Just before Christmas Philip Augustus of

France came home from Acre. After a vain attempt to

entrap the seneschal of Normandy into surrendering some

of the border fortresses of the duchy to him, he opened

negotiations for Richard's damage in a more likely quarter;

he invited John to come over and speak with him immediately,

proposing to put him in possession of “all the lands of

England and Normandy on this (i.e. the French) side of the

sea,” on one condition, that he should marry the bride whom

Richard had refused, Philip's sister Adela.” To this condition

John's existing marriage was a bar, but not an insuperable

one ; it would be easy for him to divorce Isabel on the plea

of consanguinity if he were so minded. He responded

* Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. p. 402. * Ib. p. 406.

* Ib. pp. 106, Ioy; R. Devizes, pp. 417, 418; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. Ioo.

The reservation was merely nominal; R. Diceto says the constables appointed by

William to these castles were allowed to remain, but made to give hostages for

their loyalty; while Gerald says the constables were to be appointed by the new

ministry. Probably the ministry decided to retain or reappoint the actual

constables, on the condition mentioned by Ralph.

* Gesta Ric. p. 220 ; R. Diceto, vol. ii. pp. Ioo, IoI.

* Gesta Ric. p. 236.


eagerly to Philip's invitation, and was on the point of sailing

from Southampton for France, when his plans were upset by

his mother's landing at Portsmouth on February 1 1. The

French king's treachery had come to Eleanor's knowledge,

and she had hastened back to England to do what lay in

her power for the protection of her elder son's interests. The

justiciars, who seem to have already had their suspicions of

John's loyalty, rallied round her at once. She was in fact the

only person whose right to represent the absent king was

treated by all parties as indisputable, although she had never

held any formal commission as regent. She and the justiciars

conjointly forbade John to leave the country, threatening

that if he did so they would seize all his lands for the Crown.”

For a while John hesitated, or affected to hesitate; he had

indeed at least two other secret negotiations on hand beside

that with France, and he was probably waiting to see which

of the three most required his personal superintendence, or

was likely to prove most profitable. Another proposition

besides Philip's had come to him from over sea: Long-

champ had offered to give him five hundred pounds if he

would get him reinstated as chief justiciar of England.”

John cared very little who bore the title of justiciar, if he

could secure the power for himself; his main object in

England was to gain possession of the royal castles; with

these in his hands, he could set any justiciar at defiance. The

arrangement made in the previous July had been terminated

by the chancellor's fall, and the castles of Nottingham and

Tickhill had therefore, in accordance with the last clause of

the July agreement, been restored in October to John. The

very rash project of placing all the royal castles under John's

control, said to have been mooted in London at the same

time, had evidently not been carried into effect; * but John

* R. Devizes, pp. 430, 432 ; Gesta Ric. p. 236.

* Gesta Ric. p. 237.

* R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 188; in Gesta Ric. p. 239, the sum is given as

five hundred thousand marks, “which,” as Bishop Stubbs says (note to R.

Howden, l.c.), “is of course impossible.”

* Richard of Devizes, indeed, says (p. 418) that on the chancellor's

departure over sea “Comes omnia munita terrae quibus voluit et plus crediditsibi

reddita liberavit”: but his own story about Windsor and Wallingford shows this

to be incorrect.

I 192


1192

himself had never lost sight of it, and, as a chronicler says,

“he did what he could " towards its realization. He began

with two of the most important fortresses near the capital,

Windsor and Wallingford. He dealt secretly with their

commanding officers, so that they were delivered into his

hands and filled with liegemen of his own." This would be

easy to manage in the case of Wallingford, which stood

within an “honour” belonging to John himself. The custody

of Windsor castle seems to have been, after the chancellor's

fall, entrusted for a time to the bishop of Durham, Hugh of

Puiset,” a near kinsman of the royal house. In spite of the

fact that Hugh was under sentence of excommunication from

his metropolitan, Geoffrey of York, John had chosen to

spend the Christmas of 1191 with him at Howden; thereby

of course rendering himself, in Geoffrey's estimation at

least, ipso facto excommunicate likewise, till he made

satisfaction for his offence.” Hugh of Durham had once

hoped himself to supersede Longchamp as chief justiciar,

and it is perhaps not too much to suspect that John may

have so wrought upon the old bishop's jealousy of Walter of

Rouen as to induce him to connive at a proceeding on the

part of his representatives at Windsor which would more

than compensate his wily young cousin for the temporary

ecclesiastical disgrace brought upon him by that otherwise

unaccountable Christmas visit.

The actual transfer of these two castles to John probably

did not take place till after a council held at Windsor by the

queen-mother and the justiciars, towards the end of February

or beginning of March. This council was followed by

another at Oxford. After Mid-Lent (March 12) a third

council was called, to meet this time in London, and for the

express purpose of “speaking with Count John about his

seizure of the castles.” “ John, however, had taken care

that another matter should come up for discussion first. He

had answered Longchamp's proposal by bidding him come

* R. Devizes, p. 433.

* “Episcopo Dunelmensi 434 : 15s. in Pickering pro escambio custodiae

castelli de Windsor quamdiu regi placuerit,” Pipe Roll 4 Ric. I. (1192) m. 7.

* Gesta Ric. pp. 235, 236.

* R. Devizes, p. 433.

º


over and try his luck. Thus the first piece of business with

which the council had to deal was a demand from the

chancellor, who had just landed at Dover, for a trial in the

Curia Regis of the charges on which he had been deposed.

Eleanor inclined to grant the demand. One contemporary

says that Longchamp had bribed her. In any case she

probably knew, or suspected, that Longchamp now had John

at his back; she certainly knew in what regard he was held

by Richard ; and she urged, with considerable reason, that

his deprivation must be displeasing to the king, if it were

not justified by process of law. The justiciars and the

barons, however, represented the chancellor's misdoings in

such glaring colours that she was reduced to silence." But

she was evidently not willing to join the justiciars in driving

William out of the country; and in the face of her reluct-

ance the justiciars dared not act without John. He was at

Wallingford, “laughing at their conventicles.” Messenger

after messenger was sent to him with respectful entreaties

that he would come to the council and lend it his aid in

dealing with the chancellor. He took the matter very com-

posedly, letting them all go on begging and praying till they

had humbled themselves enough to satisfy him and he had

got his final answer ready for every contingency; then he

went to London. The council, originally summoned to

remonstrate with him for his misconduct, now practically

surrendered itself wholly to his guidance. Of the castles not

a word was said; the one subject of discussion was the

chancellor. All were agreed in desiring his expulsion, if

only the count would declare himself of the same mind.

The count told them his mind with unexpected plainness.

“This chancellor will neither fear the threats nor beg the

favour of any one of you, nor of all of you put together, if

he can but get me for his friend. Within the next seven

days he is going to give me seven hundred pounds, if I

meddle not between him and you. You see that I want

money; I have said enough for wise men to understand"—

and therewith he left them.” The justiciars saw that unless

they could outbid the chancellor, their own fate was sealed.

* Gesta Ric, p. 239. * R. Devizes, pp. 433, 434.

I 192


As a last resource, “it was agreed that they should give him

or lend him some money, but not of their own; all fell upon

the treasury of the absent king.” John's greed was satisfied

by a gift, or a loan, out of the exchequer; when this was

safe in his hands, he gave the justiciars his written sanction

to their intended proceedings against the chancellor;” they

ordered William to quit the country, and he had no choice

but to obey. They had, however, purchased his expulsion at

a ruinous cost to themselves; its real price was of course not

the few hundreds of which they had robbed the exchequer for

John's benefit, but their own independence. John had out-

witted them completely, and they had practically confessed

themselves to be at his mercy. Before the council broke up,

every member of it, including the queen-mother, took another

oath of fealty “against all men” to the king “and to his

heir"—in other words, to John himself.”

John's obvious policy now was to keep still and let

things remain as they were till there should come some

definite tidings of Richard. For nine months all parties

were quiescent. Then, on December 28, the Emperor

wrote to Philip of France the news of Richard's capture.

If the messenger who brought the letter was “welcome

above gold and topaze”* to Philip, no less welcome to John

was the messenger whom Philip immediately despatched to

carry the news to England. John hurried over to Nor-

mandy, where the seneschal and barons of the duchy met

him with a request that he would join them in a council at

Alençon to deliberate “touching the king's affairs, and his

release.” John's answer was at least frank: “If ye will

acknowledge me as your lord and swear me fealty, I will

come with you and will be your defender against the king

of France; but if not, I will not come.”* The Normans

I 192

1 “Dare placet vel commodare pecuniam, sed non de proprio, tandemgue

totum cadit in absentis aerarium. Creduntur comiti de fisco per fiscarios quin-

gentae librae sterlingorum, et recipiuntur ad placitum literae in cancellarium,”

R. Devizes, p. 343. “Johannes . . . acceptis a Rothomagensi archiepiscopo

et a caeteris justitiariis Angliae duobus millibus marcis argenti de thesauro regis

fratris sui, consilio eorum adguievit,” Gesta Ric. p. 239. Possibly the smaller

sum was handed over to John at once, and the remainder only promised.

* Gesta Ric. pp. 239, 237.

* W. Newb. 1. iv. c. 32. * R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 204.


refused thus to betray their captive sovereign ; whereupon

John proceeded to the court of France. There an agree-

ment was drawn up, to which the count swore in person

and the French king by proxy, and which curiously illus-

trates their mutual distrust and their common dread of

Richard. It provided that in the event of John's succession,

he should cede the Vexin to France, and should hold the

rest of the Norman and Angevin dominions as his forefathers

had held them, with the exception of the city of Tours and

certain small underfiefs, concerning which special provisions

were made, evidently with a view to securing the co-operation

of their holders against Richard. On the other hand, John

promised to accept no offer of peace from Richard without

Philip's consent, and Philip promised to make no peace

with Richard unless the latter would accept certain con-

ditions laid down in behalf of John. These conditions

were that John should not be disseised of any lands which

he held at the time of the treaty; that if summoned to

trial by Richard, he should always be allowed to appear

by proxy; and that he should not be held liable to personal

service in Richard's host. After sealing this document in

Paris, in January I 193, John hurried back to England and

set to work secretly to stir up the Welsh and the Scots,

hoping with their support to effect a junction with a body

of Flemings who were to come over in a fleet prepared by

Philip at Wissant.

The Scot king rejected John's overtures; but a troop of

Welsh were, as usual, ready to join in any rising against the

king of England.” With these Welshmen, and “many

foreigners” whom he had brought with him from France,

John secured himself at Wallingford and Windsor. Then

he proceeded to London, told the justiciars that Richard

was dead, and bade them deliver up the kingdom and make

its people swear fealty to himself. They refused; he with-

drew in a rage, and both parties prepared for war.” The

1 Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 57. The document (of which no original is known)

may be slightly corrupt, but it is obviously more trustworthy than the version of

John's and Philip's agreement given by Roger of Howden, vol. iii. p. 204.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. i. pp. 514, 515.

* R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 204, 205.

I 193


I 193

justiciars organized their forces so quickly and so well that

when the French fleet arrived, just before Easter, it found

the coast so strongly guarded that no landing was possible.

John meanwhile had openly fortified his castles, and his

Welshmen were ravaging the country between Kingston

and Windsor when the justiciars laid siege to the latter

fortress." This siege, and that of Tickhill, which was under-

taken by Archbishop Geoffrey of York and Bishop Hugh

of Durham, were in progress when on April 20 Hubert

Walter, the bishop of Salisbury, landed in England.”

Hubert had come direct from the captive king, and it was

now useless for John to pretend any longer that Richard

was dead. On the other hand, Hubert knew the prospect

of Richard's release to be still so remote and so uncertain

that he deemed it highly imprudent to push matters to

extremity with John. He therefore, although both Windsor

and Tickhill were on the verge of surrender, persuaded the

justiciars to make a truce whose terms were on the whole

favourable to the count of Mortain. The castles of Tick-

hill and Nottingham were left in John's hands; those of

Windsor, Wallingford and the Peak were surrendered by

him, to be given over to the custody of Queen Eleanor and

other persons named, on the express understanding that

unless Richard should reach home in the meanwhile, they

were to be restored to John at the expiration of the truce,

which was fixed for Michaelmas, or, according to another

account, All Saints' Day.”

The immediate object of the justiciars and the queen-

mother in making this truce was to gain John's co-operation

in their measures for raising the king's ransom. Consider-

ing how large a portion of the kingdom was held by John

in what may almost be called absolute property, it is obvious

that a refusal on his part to bear his share of the burden

would make a serious difference in the result of their efforts.

It appears that John undertook to raise from his own terri-

tories a certain sum for his brother's ransom, that he con-

firmed this undertaking by an oath, and that he put it on

* Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 515; R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 205.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 516. * Ib. ; R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 207.


record in writing." He had, however, taken no steps

towards its execution when at the beginning of July a

warning reached him from Philip Augustus—“Take care of

yourself, for the devil is loosed l’—which meant that the

terms of Richard's release had been finally agreed upon

between Richard and the Emperor on June 29. John

immediately hurried over to France, to shelter himself under

Philip's wing against the coming storm, as was thought in

England;” more probably to keep a watch upon Philip

and take care that he should not break his promises as to

the conditions of peace with Richard. The two allies could

have no confidence in each other, and they seem to have

been both almost ridiculously afraid of the captive Lion-

heart. He, however, was at the moment equally afraid of

them, and not without good reason. Three months before

he had complained bitterly to the first messengers from

England who reached him in his prison of the treachery

and ingratitude of John. “Yet,” he added, “my brother is

not a man to win lands for himself by force, if there be

any one who will oppose him with another force, however

slight.”* The words were true; and no less true was the

implication underlying the words. Of John as an open

enemy Richard could afford to be contemptuous; of John's

capacity for underhand mischief, especially in conjunction

with Philip, he was in such fear that no sooner was his

treaty with the Emperor signed than he despatched his

chancellor and three other envoys to France with orders to

make with the French king “a peace of some sort.” “ The

envoys executed their commission literally, by accepting in

Richard's name the terms which were dictated to them by

Philip with John at his side. These included the cession

by Richard to Philip of the places taken by the French

king during his late campaign in Normandy; the ratifica-

tion of the arrangements made by Philip and John for

1 R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 217.

* Ib. pp. 216, 217.

3 “‘Johannes frater meus non est homo quisibi vi terram subjiciat, si fuerit

qui vim ejus vi saltem tenui repellat,’” R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 198. I

think there can be no doubt as to the significance of the first “vi.”

4 “Ad pacem cum illo faciendum qualemcumque,” ib. p. 217.

1 IQ3


48 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

certain of their partisans; and the payment to Philip of

twenty thousand marks, for which four castles were given to

him in pledge. “Touching Count John,” the treaty ran,

“thus shall it be : If the men of the king of England can

prove in the court of the king of France that the same John

has sworn, and given a written promise, to furnish money

for the English king's ransom, he, John, shall be held bound

to pay it; and he shall hold all his lands, on both sides of

the sea, as freely as he held them before his brother the

king of England set out on his journey over sea; only he

shall be free from the oath which he then swore of not set-

ting foot in England; and of this the English king shall

give him security by himself, and by the barons and prelates

of his realm, and by the king of France. If, however, Count

John shall choose to deny that those letters are his, or

that he swore to do that thing, the English king's men

shall prove sufficiently, by fitting witnesses, in the French

king's court, that he did swear to procure money for

the English king's ransom. And if it shall be proved, as

hath been said, that he did swear to do this, or if he shall

fail to meet the charge, the king of France shall not concern

himself with Count John, if he should choose to accept peace

for his lands aforesaid.”"

This treaty was drawn up at Nantes on July 9.”

John at once returned to Normandy and there took an oath

of liege homage to his brother; whereupon Richard ordered

all the castles of John's honours to be restored to him, on

I 193

* “De comite autem. Johanne sic erit: quod si homines regis Angliae

poterunt sufficienter monstrare in curia domini regis Franciae quod idem Johannes

juraverit ad perquirendam pecuniam ad liberationem regis Angliae, et de hoc

dederit litteras suas, ipse Johannes tenebitur ad solvendum, et totam terram quam

ipse tenebat quando rex Angliae frater ejus iter arripuit ultra mare, tenebit, citra

mare et ultra, ita libere sicut prius tenebat; excepto eo quod liber erit a sacra-

mento quod fecerat de non intranda terra Angliae; et de hoc dictus rex Angliae

faciet dominum Johannem securum per se, et per barones et archiepiscopos et

episcopos terrae suae, et insuper per regem Franciae. Si autem comes Johannes

vellet negare quod litterae illae non essent suae, aut quod illud non jurasset,

homines regis Angliae sufficienter in curia regis Franciae monstrabunt, peridoneos

testes, quod juraverit ad querendam pecuniam ad liberationem regis Angliae. Si

autem monstratum fuerit, sicut dictum est, quod comes juraverit ad quaerendam

pecuniam ad liberationem regis, vel si defecerit de recipienda monstratione, rex

Franciae non intromittat se de comite Johanne, si pacem de terra sua praedicta

recipere voluerit,” R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 217, 218. * Ib. p. 220.


both sides of the sea. “But the keepers thereof would not

give up any castle to him " on the strength of this order."

John in a rage went back to France, and Philip immediately

gave him the custody of two Norman castles, Driencourt

and Arques, which by the recent treaty had been intrusted

to the archbishop of Reims in pledge for the twenty thousand

marks promised to Philip by Richard.” At Christmas the

two allies made a last desperate effort to prevent the “devil.”

from being “loosed.” They offered the Emperor three

alternatives: either Philip would give him fifty thousand

marks, and John would give him thirty thousand, if he

would keep Richard prisoner until the following Michaelmas

(I 194); or the two between them would pay him a

thousand pounds a month so long as he kept Richard in

captivity; or Philip would give him a hundred thousand

marks and John fifty thousand, if he would either detain

Richard for another twelvemonth, or deliver him up into

their hands. “Behold how they loved him 1" says a con-

temporary writer.” A hundred and fifty thousand marks

was the ransom which had been agreed upon between

Henry VI. and Richard, and the one question which troubled

Henry was whether he had a better chance of actually

getting that sum from Richard or from his enemies. He

unblushingly stated this fact to Richard himself, and on

February 2, 1194, showed him the letters of Philip and John.

Richard appealed to the German princes who had witnessed

his treaty with Henry, and by promises of liberal revenues

to be granted to them from England induced them to take

his part and insist upon Henry's fulfilling his agreement.

On February 4 the English king was set at liberty, and a

joint letter from the Emperor and the nobles of his realm

was despatched to Philip and John, bidding them restore to

Richard all that they had taken from him during his

* “Sed custodes illorum noluerunt tradere illi aliquod castellum per breve,”

R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 227, 228. Did they suspect John of having forged the

king's writ? Or should the words be “nisi per breve,” and do they mean that

the individual castellans refused to act upon what seems to have been a merely

general order, and require a special writ for each castle?

* Ib. p. 228.

* Ib. p. 229. Cf. W. Newb. 1. iv. c. 40.

E

I IQ3

II94




II94

*

captivity, and threatening that if they failed to do so, the

writers would do their utmost to compel them."

Before this letter could have reached its destination,

John sent to England a confidential clerk, Adam of S.

Edmund's, with secret letters, ordering that all the castles

which he held there should be made ready for defence

against the king. This man, having reached London with-

out hindrance, foolishly presented himself on February 9

at the house of the new archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert

Walter. The archbishop invited him to dinner, an un-

expected honour by which Adam's head was so completely

turned that he boasted openly at table of his master's hopes

of political advancement. Hubert listened without remark,

and thinking that to arrest the babbler on the spot would

be a breach of hospitality, suffered him to depart after

dinner; but the mayor of London—warned no doubt by

the archbishop himself or by one of the other guests—seized

Adam on his way back to his lodging, took possession of

his papers, and sent them to Hubert, who on the following

day laid them before a council of bishops and barons. The

council unanimously decreed that John should be disseised

of all his lands in England, and that his castles should be

reduced by force; the bishops excommunicated him and all

his adherents. Then the old bishop of Durham set off to

renew the siege of Tickhill; the earls of Chester, Hunting-

don and Ferrars laid siege to the castle of Nottingham ;

Archbishop Hubert himself undertook that of Marlborough,

which he won in a few days; and Lancaster was given up

to him by his brother Theobald. On March 13 Richard

arrived in England. His arrival was speedily followed by

the surrender of Tickhill. On the 25th he appeared before

Nottingham ; on the 28th he was once again master of its

castle, and of all England.”

At Nottingham Richard held a council, on the second

day of which (March 31) he “prayed that justice should

be done him”* on John and on John's chief abettor, Bishop

Hugh of Chester. The council cited both delinquents to

* R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 232, 234. * Ib. 236-40.

* “Petiit sibi fieri judicium de comite Johanne,” etc., ib. p. 241.


appear for trial within forty days, and decreed that if they

failed to do so, or to “stand to right,” Hugh should be

liable to a double sentence—from the bishops as a bishop,

and from the laity as a sheriff"—and John should be

accounted to have “forfeited all claims to the kingdom,”

or, as a later annalist explains, should be “deprived and

disinherited not only of all the lands which he held in the

realm, but also of all honours which he hoped or expected

to have from the Crown of England.”* Neither in person

nor by proxy did John answer the citation. At the end of

the forty days three earls set out for the court of France

“to convict him of treason there"; but of their proceedings,

too, he took no notice. The forty days had expired on

May 1o ; on the 12th Richard sailed for Normandy."

Landing at Barfleur, he went to Caen and thence turned

southward to relieve Verneuil, which Philip was besieging.

On the way he halted at Lisieux, where he took up his

quarters with the archdeacon, John of Alençon, who had

been his vice-chancellor," He soon noticed that his host

was uneasy and agitated, and at once guessed the cause.

“Why do you look so troubled P You have seen my

brother John ; deny it not l Let him fear nought, but

come to me straightway. He is my brother, and should

have no fears of me; if he has played the fool, I will never

reproach him with his folly. Those who contrived this

mischief shall reap their due reward; but of that no more

at present.” Joyfully John of Alençon carried the tidings

to his namesake of Mortain : “Come forward boldly You

are in luck's way. The king is simple and pitiful, and kinder

to you than you would have been to him. Your masters

have advised you ill; it is meet they should be punished

according to their deserts. Come ! the king awaits you.”

In spite of these assurances, it was “with much fear” that

Count John approached his brother and threw himself at his

1 Hugh was sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire.

* “Demeruisse regnum,” R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 242.

* Ann. Margan. a. I 199.

* R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 251.

* For John of Alençon see Round, Calendar of Doc. in France, vol. i. pp.

14, 15, 9o, 91, 210, 454, 528.

II94

4


II94

feet. Richard raised him with a brotherly kiss, saying:

“Think no more of it, John | You are but a child, and were

left to ill guardians. Evil were their thoughts who counselled

you amiss. Rise, go and eat. John,” he added, turning to

their host, “what can he have for dinner P” At that

moment a salmon was brought in, as a present for the king.

As the chronicler remarks, “it did not come amiss”;

Richard immediately ordered it to be cooked for his

brother."

For any other man of six-and-twenty, to be thus forgiven

—even though it were by a brother who was ten years older,

and a king—expressly on the ground that he was a child,

not responsible for his actions, would surely have been a

humiliation almost more bitter than any punishment. Nor

did John escape altogether unpunished. Richard's forgive-

ness was strictly personal ; the decree of the council of

Nottingham was carried into effect with regard to all John's

English and Norman lands;” and for the next eighteen

months he was, save for his lordship of Ireland, once more

1 Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 10365-419. R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 114, places

the meeting of the brothers at Brueis; and Roger of Howden, vol. iii. p. 252,

says their reconciliation took place “mediante Alienor regina matre eorum.”

This may mean either that she had interceded with Richard before he left

England, or that it was she who had counselled John to throw himself on the

king's clemency.

* R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 252. Some of John's English lands had been

seized before the council of Nottingham; no doubt, by virtue of the decree

passed at the council in London on February Io. In the Pipe Roll of

Michaelmas 1194 the king's officers accounted to the king's treasury for the

ferms of Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Dorset and Somerset, the third penny of

Gloucestershire, and the ferm of Eye, for half a year (P.R. 6 Ric. I. m. 6, 13,

16, 4 d); but the sheriff of Devon and Cornwall rendered his account for three-

quarters of a year (ib. m. 12); while the forfeiture of John's private estates in

Dorset and Somerset seems to have been dated from Ash-Wednesday, February

23 (ib. m. 13 d); a part at least of the honour of Gloucester, viz. Bristol,

had been seized at Mid-Lent, four days after Richard's landing in England, and

the whole not later than Easter (ib. m. 16 d); and for the honours of Peverel

and Tickhill a whole year's ferm was reckoned as due to the treasury at Michael-

mas (ib. m. 6). The king's escheators rendered a separate account of a number

of escheats in the honour of Lancaster and in the counties which John had held

(ib. m. 2, 2 d); and the sheriff of Dorset and Somerset gathered in for the king

a quantity of “arrears of debts which were owed to Count John for pleas and

amercements of the men and townships” of those two counties (ib. m. 13). The

commission issued to the itinerant justices in the same month of September con-

tained an express order that they should inquire into and report upon all John's

property, real and personal, and all the moneys owed to him, to the intent that

the whole might be secured for the king, R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 263,264.


in fact as well as in name “John Lackland.” He was thus

wholly dependent on Richard's goodwill, and it was obviously

politic for him to throw himself into Richard's service with

the utmost energy and zeal. Philip withdrew from Verneuil

at the tidings of Richard's approach, May 28. After

securing the place the English king divided his forces; with

part of them he himself went to besiege Beaumont-le-Roger;

the other part he entrusted to John for the recovery of

Evreux,” which had been taken by Philip in February.”

Of the manner in which John accomplished this mission

there are at least two versions. One writer states that

John “laid siege to Evreux, and it was taken next day.” “

Another says that its garrison were surprised and slain by

a body of Normans;" while a third explains the surprise as

having been effected by means which are perhaps only too

characteristic of John. The city of Evreux, says William

the Breton, had been made over to John by Philip. John

contrived that his reconciliation with his brother should

remain unknown to the French troops who had been left

there. He now returned to the city and invited these

Frenchmen to a banquet, at which he suddenly brought in

a troop of “armed Englishmen” who massacred the un-

suspecting guests. His success, however, was only partial

and shortlived; for he was still unable to gain possession of

the castle;" and he had no sooner quitted the place than

Philip returned, drove out the Norman troops, and destroyed

the town." Shortly afterwards Richard set off on a campaign

in the south, leaving John in Normandy. About the middle

of June Philip again threatened Rouen, taking and razing

Fontaines, a castle only four miles from the city. On this

John, the earl of Leicester, and “many other barons” held

a meeting at Rouen to consider what should be done; “but

because they had no one to whom they could adhere as to

* R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 252.

* Hist, de. G. le Mar, vv. 10491-517.

* W. Newb. l. iv. c. 40; Rigord, c. 94.

* Hist, de. G. le Mar. vv. IoS16-20. * Rigord, c. 96.

° W. Armor. Gesta Phil. Aug. c. 72; Philipp. l. iv. vv. 445-62. The last

detail seems to imply that the victims of the surprise—whatever its character—

were, after all, not the whole garrison, but probably only the officers.

7 Rigord, c. 96,

II94


II 94

I 196

the king himself,” and their forces were no match for Philip's,

they decided upon a policy of inaction.” This decision was

probably dictated by their experience of Philip's ways. He,

in fact, made no further attempt upon the Norman capital,

but soon afterwards proceeded southward against Richard,

only to meet with an ignominious defeat at Fréteval. On

hearing of this, John and the earl of Arundel laid siege to

Vaudreuil; Philip, however, marched up from Bourges and

relieved it.” John's next military undertaking, the siege of

Brezolles, met with no better success." Still he had done

the best he could for his brother's interest, and thereby also

for his own. Accordingly, next year Richard “laid aside

all his anger and ill-will towards his brother John,” and

restored to him a portion of his forfeited possessions. It

was indeed only a small portion, consisting of the county

of Mortain and the honours of Gloucester and Eye “in

their entirety, but without their castles.” To this was added,

as some compensation for the other lands which he had lost,

a yearly pension of £8ooo Angevin.”

This arrangement seems to have taken effect from

Michaelmas I 195." It gave John once more an honour-

able and independent maintenance, but left him without

territorial power. His only chance of regaining this in

Richard's lifetime was to earn it by loyalty to Richard. For

the next three years, therefore, he kept quiet; nothing is

heard of him save an occasional notice of his presence in

Normandy, either in his brother's company or acting for his

brother's interest. When Philip seized Nonancourt in

I 196, John retaliated by seizing Gamaches." On May

19 in the same year he and Mercadier, the leader of

Richard's foreign mercenaries, made a plundering expedition

into the French king's territories as far as Beauvais, where

they captured the bishop, who had long been one of

* R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 253.

* Rigord, c. Ioo; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 74; Philipp. l. iv. vv. 530-69.

° W. Armor. Philipp. l. v. vv. 30-32,

* R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 286.

* I can find no mention either of the honour of Eye or of that of Gloucester

in Pipe Roll 7 Ric. I. (1196).

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 5.


Richard's most determined enemies; they then went on

to the bishop's castle of Milli, took it by assault, razed it,

and returned to Normandy in triumph to present their

captive to Richard." On October 16, 1197, when the

king and the archbishop of Rouen made their agreement

for the building of a castle at Andely—the famous Château-

Gaillard—it was ratified in a separate charter by John ; an

unusual proceeding, which has been thought to imply that

he was now again acknowledged as his brother's destined

heir.” In 1198 Philip made another attack upon Nor-

mandy and burned Evreux and seven other towns. John

fired a ninth, Neubourg; Philip, seeing the flames and

supposing them to have been kindled by his own men, sent

a body of troops to bid them go no farther, on which John

fell upon the troops and captured eighteen knights and a

crowd of men-at-arms.”

The alliance of Richard and John had now lasted too

long for Philip's satisfaction, and early in I 199 he set him-

self to break it. He began by making a truce with Richard.

Then, when the Lion-heart, thinking himself safe for the

moment in Normandy, was on his way to Poitou, “that

sower of discord, the king of France, sent him word that

his brother John, the count of Mortain, had given himself

to him (Philip); and he offered to show him John's own

letter proving the fact. O marvel ! The king of England

believed the king of France, and took to hating his brother

John, insomuch that he caused him to be disseised of his

lands on both sides of the sea. And when John asked the

reason of this wrath and hatred, he was told what the king

of France had sent word to his brother about him, There-

upon the count of Mortain sent two knights to represent

him at the French king's court, and they offered to prove

him innocent of this charge, or to defend him as the court

should direct. But there was found no one in that court,

neither the king nor any other man, who would receive the

offered proof or defence. And thenceforth the king of

II97

1 R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 16. Cf. W. Newb. 1. v. c. 31.

* Deville, Hist, du Château-Gaillard, pp. 21, 22, 1 19-23.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 60.

I 198

I 199




II99

Nº.

England was on more familiar terms with his brother John,

and less ready to believe what was told him by the king of

France.”" This story does not necessarily show either that

Philip's accusation of John was false, or that it was true.

Philip may have invented it with the hope of driving John

to throw himself again into his arms; but it is perhaps

more likely that the two were in collusion, and that the

scene in the French Curia Regis was a piece of acting on

both sides. However this might be, by about the middle of

March John had again left his brother “because he kept

him so short of money, and on account of some disputes

which had arisen between them.”* Suddenly, at the end

of the month, the question of the Angevin succession was

brought to a crisis by a cross-bowman who, at the siege

of Châlus, on March 26, gave Richard his death-wound.

That question had haunted Richard throughout his reign ;

his wishes respecting its solution had wavered more than

once ; now that it had to be faced, however, he faced it in

what was, after all, the wisest as well as the most generous

way. In the presence of as many of his subjects as could

be gathered hastily round him, he devised all his realms to

John, gave orders that on his own death John should be

put in possession of all the royal castles and three-fourths

of the royal treasure, and made the assembly swear fealty

to John as his successor.”

Richard died on April 6.4. On the 3rd there had been

delivered at Rouen a letter from him appointing William

the Marshal commandant of the castle and keeper of the

treasure which it contained. On the Ioth—the eve of

Palm Sunday—the news of the king's death came, late at

night, just as the Marshal was going to bed. He dressed

again in haste and went to the palace of the archbishop,

who marvelled what could have brought him at such an

hour, and when told, was, like William himself, overwhelmed

with grief and consternation. What troubled them both

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 81.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 99.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 83. The fourth part of the royal treasure was to

be given to Richard's servants and to the poor.

* Ib. p. 84.


was the thought of the future. William went straight to

the point. “My lord, we must hasten to choose some one

whom we may make king.” “I think and believe,” an-

swered Archbishop Walter, “that according to right, we

ought to make Arthur king.” “To my thinking,” said the

Marshal, “that would be bad. Arthur is counselled by

traitors; he is haughty and proud ; and if we set him over

us he will seek evil against us, for he loves not the people

of this land. He shall not come here yet, by my advice.

Look rather at Count John ; my conscience and my know-

ledge point him out to me as the nearest heir to the land

which was his father's and his brother's.” “Marshal, is this

really your desire?” “Yea, my lord; for it is reason.

Unquestionably, a son has a nearer claim to his father's

land than a grandson ; it is right that he should have it.”

“So be it, then,” said the archbishop; “but mark my

words, Marshal; of nothing that ever you did in your life

have you so much cause to repent as you will have of what

you are now doing.” “I thank you,” answered William ;

“nevertheless, I deem that thus it should be.”"

In the conversation thus reported by the Marshal's

confidential squire there are several noticeable points. The

divergent views enunciated by the two speakers as to the

respective legal claims of Arthur and of John illustrate the

still uncertain condition of the rules of hereditary succession.

It is, however, plain that the legal aspect of the case was

but a minor matter in the eyes of both primate and Marshal.

For them the important question was not which of Richard's

two possible heirs had the best legal right to his heritage,

but which of the two was likely to make the least unsatis-

factory sovereign. The outlook was in any case a gloomy

1 Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 11877-908. These lines may be an almost

literal report of the interview as described by the Marshal himself to the writer,

John d'Erlée. John was the Marshal's favourite squire, and was immediately

despatched by him on an important mission to England; see vv. 11909-16.

It has been suggested (Dic. Mat. Biog. “Marshal, William ”) that “li arceves-

ques”—as John calls him, without either Christian name or title of see—may

have been not Walter of Rouen, but Hubert of Canterbury. Hubert was in

Normandy at the time; but the advocacy of Arthur's claims, intelligible enough

in the mouth of a Norman prelate, is so contrary to the English political traditions

of those days that I cannot, without further evidence, ascribe it to such a

thoroughly English statesman as Archbishop Hubert Walter.

I 199


I 199

one ; the only choice was a choice of evils. Of the two

evils, it was natural that Walter should regard John as the

worst, if he thought of personal character alone, Every one

knew by this time what John was ; the most impartial of

contemporary historians had already summed up his char-

acter in two words—“Nature's enemy,” a monster." What

Arthur might become was as yet uncertain; the duke of

Britanny was but twelve years old. Yet even at that age,

the “haughtiness and pride” ascribed to him by the Marshal

are by no means unlikely to have shown themselves in a

child whose father, Geoffrey, had been the evil genius of

John's early life, and whose mother had for years set her

second husband Earl Ralf of Chester, her brother-in-law

King Richard, and her supreme overlord King Philip, all

alike at defiance. Not so much in Arthur's character, how-

ever, as in his circumstances, lay the main ground of the

Marshal's objection to him as a sovereign. From his cradle

Arthur had been trained in hostility to the political system

at the head of which the Norman primate now proposed to

place him. His very name had been given him by his

mother and her people in defiance of his grandfather King

Henry, as a badge of Breton independence and insubordina-

tion to the rule of the Angevin and Norman house. From

the hour of Henry's death in 1189, if not even from that of

her son's birth in 1187, Constance of Britanny had governed

her duchy and trained its infant heir as seemed good to

herself and her people, till in I I 96 she was at last entrapped

and imprisoned in Normandy; and then the result of her

capture was that her boy fell into the keeping of another

guardian not a whit less “traitorous,” from the Norman or

Angevin point of view, than the patriotic Bretons who had

surrounded him hitherto—the king of the French, at whose

court he was kept for some time, sharing the education of

Philip's own son. To confer the sovereignty of the Angevin

dominions upon the boy Arthur would thus have been

practically to lay it at the feet of Philip Augustus. The

only chance of preserving the integrity of the Angevin

empire was to put a man at its head, and a man to whom

* “Hostis naturae Johannes,” W. Newb. 1. iv. c. 40.


II JOHN Cov/v7 of MORTAIN 59

the maintenance of that integrity would be a matter of

personal interest as well as of family pride. It was the

consciousness of this that had made Richard abandon his

momentary scheme of designating Arthur as his heir, and

revert finally to John ; and it was the same consciousness

which made William the Marshal, with his eyes fully open

to John's character, hold fast, in the teeth of the primate's

warning, to his conviction that “thus it should be.”

John, after his last parting from his brother, had made

a characteristic political venture; he had sought to make

friends with his boy-rival. It was in Britanny, at Arthur's

court, that he received the news of Richard's death. He

set off at once for Chinon ; money was his first need, and

the Angevin treasury was there. When he reached the

place, on the Wednesday before Easter, April 14—three

days after Richard's burial at Fontevraud—the castle and

the treasure which it contained were at once given up to

him by the commandant, Robert of Turnham, the seneschal

of Anjou.” The officers of the late king's household had

hurried to meet his chosen heir, and now came to John

demanding of him a solemn oath that he would carry into

effect Richard's last wishes, and maintain the customs of the

Angevin lands. He took the oath, and they then acknow-

ledged him as their lord in Richard's stead.”

The most venerated of English bishops then living,

Hugh of Lincoln, had officiated at Richard's funeral and

was still at Fontevraud. John sent an urgent request for

his presence at Chinon, welcomed him there with a great

show of attachment, and proposed that they should travel to

England together. 