 169;
 W. Armor. _Gesta P. A._ c. 172; and _Hist. des Ducs_, p. 143.
 
 [886] _Itin._ a. 16.
 
 [887] M. Petit-Dutaillis (_Louis VIII._ p. 49) remarks that the modern
 post-office spelling, “La Roche-aux-Moines,” is wrong, the Latin form
 being “Rupes Monachi,” not “Monachorum.”
 
 [888] W. Armor. _Gesta P. A._ c. 178.
 
 [889] Dates from _Itin._ a. 16.
 
 [890] R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 286.
 
 [891] W. Armor. _Philipp._ l. x. vv. 202–18.
 
 [892] R. Wendover, _l.c._
 
 [893] W. Armor. _Philipp._ l. x. vv. 243–65.
 
 [894] W. Armor. _Gesta P. A._ c. 179. Cf. Itin. a. 16.
 
 [895] Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 287, and M. Paris, _Hist. Angl._
 vol. ii. p. 150.
 
 [896] _Rot. Pat._ p. 118 b.
 
 [897] Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 288–91; M. Paris, _Hist. Angl._
 vol. ii. p. 151; W. Armor. _Gesta P. A._ cc. 181–97; R. Coggeshall, p.
 169 (wrong date), and W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 216.
 
 [898] M. Paris, _Hist. Angl._ vol. ii. p. 151.
 
 [899] R. Coggeshall, p. 170; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 216.
 
 [900] _Rot. Claus._ vol. i. p. 210 b.
 
 [901] _Rot. Pat._ vol. i. p. 139.
 
 [902] R. Coggeshall, p. 167. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 214.
 
 [903] _Foedera_, vol. i. pt. i. p. 124.
 
 [904] W. Armor. _Gesta P. A._ c. 204.
 
 [905] _Foedera_, _l.c._
 
 [906] _Itin._ a. 16.
 
 [907] _Rot. Pat._ p. 140 b.
 
 [908] W. Armor. _Gesta P. A._ c. 204.
 
 [909] R. Coggeshall, p. 170.
 
 [910] _Foedera_, vol. i. pt. i. p. 125. There is a mutilated version of
 this document in R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 292, 293.
 
 [911] “Expletis agendis suis in partibus transmarinis, rediit in
 Angliam,” R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 293.
 
 [912] _Itin._ a. 16; for the last date see _Memorials of S. Edmund’s_,
 vol. ii. p. 92.
 
 [913] _Rot. Pat._ p. 111 b.
 
 [914] R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 283, 284. The terms are stated in a
 very confused way, both in the Pope’s letter (given _l.c._; also in
 _Rot. Chart._ pp. 208, 209), in a letter of Earl William of Ferrars
 (_Rot. Pat._ p. 139; Ferrars was one of those who swore as sureties
 for the king), and in that of John himself (_Rot. Chart._ p. 199); but
 a comparison of the three documents with Roger’s own account of the
 matter makes it tolerably clear that Nicolas was authorized to raise
 the interdict as soon as he had obtained security for the payment of
 twelve thousand marks a year, in half-yearly instalments, till the
 total of forty thousand should be complete.
 
 [915] _Rot. Chart._ p. 199.
 
 [916] R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 284, makes the date June 29; W.
 Coventry, vol. ii. p. 217, R. Coggeshall, p. 169, and _Ann. Waverl._ a.
 1214, make it July 2.
 
 [917] _Rot. Claus._ vol. i. pp. 208, 208 b, 209.
 
 [918] R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 284, 285.
 
 [919] _Rot. Pat._ pp. 124, 140 b, 141.
 
 [920] W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 215.
 
 [921] At Dunstable, “after the octave of Epiphany,” R. Wendover, vol.
 iii. p. 278.
 
 [922] R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 278, 279, says that Nicolas, with the
 king’s assent, sent Pandulf specially to plead for him at Rome against
 the archbishop; but Pandulf’s approaching departure over sea “in
 nuncium nostrum” was announced by John on January 4 (_Rot. Claus._ vol.
 i. p. 141), ten days at least before Stephen’s appeal was made or even
 threatened.
 
 [923, 924] Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 278, 279, and R. Coggeshall,
 p. 170.
 
 [925] _Statutes of the Realm_, Charters of Liberties, p. 5. A copy of
 this grant, with the date January 15, is printed in _Foedera_, vol. i.
 pt. i. pp. 126–7.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER VI
 
 JOHN AND THE BARONS
 
 1214–1215
 
   Ki ore vaurroit oïr l’ocoison de la guerre dont li rois Jehans
   moru deshiretés de la plus grant partie d’Engletierre, bien le
   poroit oïr en cest escrit.
 
               _Hist. des Ducs de Normandie_, p. 145.
 
   Intervenientibus itaque archiepiscopo Cantuariensi cum pluribus
   coepiscopis et baronibus nonnullis, quasi pax inter regem et barones
   formata est.
 
               R. COGGESHALL, p. 172.
 
 
 [Sidenote: 1214]
 
 On May 26, 1214, John had issued writs for the collection of a scutage
 of three marks per fee from all tenants-in-chief, royal demesnes,
 vacant bishoprics, lands in royal wardship, and escheats, except those
 fees which were personally represented in the army in Poitou; on these
 the scutage was, as usual, to be remitted by royal warrant.[926] Those
 northern barons who had refused to serve now refused to pay. They
 adhered to their contention that they were by their tenure exempt
 from the obligation to foreign service, and they argued that, in
 consequence, they were also exempt from the obligation to payment in
 substitution for such service.[927] Whether they claimed this double
 exemption as a privilege peculiar to themselves, or as common to the
 whole baronage, is not quite clear. In either case the claim would
 have been difficult, if not impossible, to prove. There is nothing to
 indicate that the fiefs in northern England had been originally granted
 on different conditions from those in the south. On the other hand,
 there are, indeed, some slight indications of the possible existence
 in some quarters, in the days of both Richard and Henry, of a theory
 that the obligation to foreign service--and therefore to payment of
 scutage for a foreign war--did not form part of the regular obligations
 of military tenure; in other words, that tenants-in-chivalry were not
 legally bound to serve in, or to pay for, any war save one of defence.
 But no general attempt had ever been made even to formulate such a
 theory, far less to carry it out to its logical consequences; and it
 is obvious that those consequences would have made it practically
 impossible for the kings of England to carry on any continental warfare
 at all. When John in reply to the northern recalcitrants insisted that
 “it always used to be so done”--that is, foreign service had been
 rendered or scutage paid in its stead--in his father’s and brother’s
 days,[928] he was unquestionably right; and he might have added that it
 had also been so done, over and over again, in the early years of his
 own reign. The protest of the northern barons seems to have been made
 to him in a personal meeting very soon after his return to England;
 we are told that “the matter would have gone further, had it not
 been checked by the presence of the legate.” It seems indeed to have
 gone further notwithstanding that obstacle, for the same chronicler
 adds: “There was brought forth a certain charter of liberties given
 to the English by Henry I., which the said barons asked the king to
 confirm.”[929]
 
 [Sidenote: 1213]
 
 If we may believe a report which was current a few years later, this
 demand had been first suggested to the barons, more than a year
 before, by Archbishop Stephen of Canterbury. On August 25, 1213; he
 had gathered the bishops, abbots and other ecclesiastical dignitaries,
 with some of the lay magnates, around him in S. Paul’s cathedral that
 they might receive his instructions concerning a partial relaxation of
 the interdict, which he was empowered to grant, pending the arrival of
 the legate. It was said[930] that he had afterwards called aside the
 lay members of the assembly to a secret meeting in which he laid before
 them a yet weightier matter. “Ye have heard”--thus he was reported to
 have addressed them--“how, when I absolved the king at Winchester, I
 made him swear to put down bad laws and enforce throughout his realm
 the good laws of Edward. Now, there has been found also a certain
 charter of King Henry I. by which, if ye will, ye may recall to their
 former estate the liberties which ye have so long lost”:--and he caused
 the document in question--the coronation-charter of Henry I.--to be
 read aloud before them. “And when this charter had been read through
 and interpreted to the barons, they rejoiced with very great joy, and
 all swore in the archbishop’s presence that when they saw a fitting
 time they would fight for those liberties, if it were needful, even
 unto death; the archbishop, too, promised them his most faithful help
 to the utmost of his power. And, a confederacy being thus made between
 them, the conference was dissolved.”[931] This story is given by Roger
 of Wendover only as a rumour; but whether the rumour were literally
 true or not, it was at any rate founded upon a fact: the fact that the
 movement which was to result in the Great Charter owed its true impulse
 to the patriotism, as it owed its success to the statesmanship, not of
 any of the barons, but of Stephen Langton.
 
 [Sidenote: 1214]
 
 During eight months out of the fourteen which elapsed between the
 archbishop’s return and that of the king, the administration of
 government was in the hands of Peter des Roches, and he ruled the
 country with a rod of iron.[932] But Peter’s vice-regal tyranny was
 only the final outcome of a state of things which had been growing
 worse from year to year for more than a quarter of a century. England
 in the sixteenth year of King John was suffering under an accumulation
 of grievances consisting, as Ralph of Coggeshall truly says, of all
 “the evil customs which the king’s father and brother had raised up for
 the oppression of the Church and realm, together with the abuses which
 the king himself had added thereto.”[933] No doubt these last formed
 the worst part of the evil, and it was the addition of them that
 gave such an increase of bitterness to all the rest. The obligation
 laid upon all men to attend the Forest courts, when summoned, whether
 subject to their jurisdiction or not, had been a hardship ever since
 it was imposed by Henry II. in 1184; the working of the Forest laws
 had been a source of suffering from a period much earlier still; but
 the area of the hardship and the suffering was rendered more extensive
 by the new afforestations made by John.[934] The inconvenience caused
 by the old practice of making common pleas “follow the king”--that
 is, of holding trials of civil causes only before the justices who
 accompanied the king, wheresoever he might be--had been felt in Henry’s
 time, and Henry had tried to remedy it by setting up a permanent bench
 of justices in a fixed place to deal with such causes. But the right
 retained by the sovereign of calling up suits from this tribunal to his
 own presence was exercised by John to a degree which his restless and
 erratic movements--almost more restless and erratic than those of his
 father--seem to have rendered extremely vexatious to litigants.[935]
 The precise limits of the king’s rights over his tenants-in-chief as to
 military service, scutage, control over their castles, and such-like
 matters, had been more or less in dispute throughout the two preceding
 reigns; but the bitterness of such disputes was intensified by John’s
 personal dealings with his barons, his subtle contrivances for stealing
 from them their rights over their own tenants and their own lands, his
 interference with their domestic life by his continual demands for
 hostages, and, above all, in many cases, by a desecration of their
 homes which blood alone could expiate.
 
 Again, the corrupt administration of the sheriffs had been matter of
 complaint under Henry; but it was far worse under John; for whereas
 Henry, and after him Hubert Walter acting for Richard, had endeavoured
 by various means to check the independent action and curtail the powers
 of the sheriffs, now the king himself was almost openly in league with
 those officers, and their usurpations and extortions were not merely
 condoned, but encouraged, if not even directly instigated, by him for
 his own interest. Owing to the rise in the value of land and a variety
 of other causes, the sheriffs’ annual receipts had for many years
 past been generally in considerable excess of the sum--fixed under
 the Norman kings on the basis of the Domesday Survey--for which they
 were accountable to the royal treasury as ferm of the shire. Whatever
 they received beyond this fixed sum seems to have been originally, in
 theory at least, their own profit. But a share of it was naturally soon
 claimed by the Crown; and this was done, not by putting the ferm at a
 higher figure, but by charging the sheriff with an additional lump sum
 under the title of _crementum_, or, in John’s time, _proficuum_.[936]
 Whatever proportion the increment thus paid to the Crown may have
 borne to the actual receipts of the sheriffs, it is clear that under
 a sovereign of John’s character an arrangement which made king and
 sheriff partners in gain would make them also partners in extortion.
 The partnership began when the sheriff entered upon his office; he
 was appointed to it by the king alone, he held it during the king’s
 pleasure; John had no trouble in finding sheriffs after his own heart.
 As the improvement of the royal demesnes and the legitimate proceeds
 of royal jurisdiction were inadequate to produce increment on a scale
 such as is shown in some of the Pipe Rolls of the reign, these men
 fleeced the people of their shire by every means they could devise, for
 the joint profit of the king and themselves; and the king connived at
 and abetted every possible usurpation of the sheriffs, that they might
 wring out of the shire a larger amount of money for him. They set at
 nought the restrictions which John’s predecessors had placed upon their
 action. They took upon themselves to keep the pleas of the Crown,
 without reference to the coroners to whom that duty had been specially
 intrusted under Richard.[937] They accused men of offences and sent
 them to the ordeal without more ado, in defiance of Henry’s ordinance
 limiting the employment of that mode of trial to cases in which the
 charge was made on the presentment of a sworn jury.[938] The corrupt
 and extortionate rule of the sheriffs had been strongly condemned by
 the bishops and magnates in the king’s name at the council at S. Albans
 in August 1213, and it is said that after the coming of the legate some
 attempt was made to check these abuses by removing the most glaring
 offenders from office;[939] but a mere change of officers was of little
 avail; the fault lay not only in the persons who worked the system, but
 also in the system itself; and the evil extended far beyond the sphere
 of the sheriffs’ activity.
 
 The whole judicial administration of the realm was corrupt. There was
 very distinctly one law for the rich and another for the poor.[940]
 Justice was sold, delayed, or refused altogether, at the king’s
 will.[941] Proceedings for which the presence of only the parties
 concerned in the suit, and a certain number of jurors, was legally
 necessary, were made a pretext for summoning other persons,[942]
 evidently for the sake of exacting fines from them if they failed to
 attend, and were protracted[943] so as to make attendance as vexatious
 as possible, that there might be the more defaulters and the more
 fines. The course of justice was subjected to constant interference
 through the summary evocation of causes from the lower courts to that
 of the king, at the instance of any suitor who could afford to pay for
 the writ of “_praecipe_” whereby the sheriff was authorized to effect
 the transfer.[944] Fines were imposed without regard either to the
 scale of the offence or the offender’s means of paying, so that men
 of all classes were reduced by them to ruin, being unable to make up
 the required sum except by selling their sole means of livelihood--the
 free yeoman his tenement, the villein his cart, the merchant his stock
 in trade;[945] clerks were amerced to the full value not only of any
 lay tenement which they possessed, but also of their ecclesiastical
 benefices.[946] Henry’s Assize had given to the Crown only the chattels
 of a convicted felon; but now the Crown took his land also, without
 compensation to the mesne lord to whom it ought to have reverted.[947]
 
 The exactions and usurpations of the Crown were of the most various
 kinds, and affected every class of society. Reliefs of arbitrary and
 unreasonable amount were again, as in the Red King’s days, exacted
 from tenants-in-chief on succession to their estates.[948] Sub-tenants
 holding land which formed part of an escheated honour were made to pay
 relief not as other sub-tenants paid to their immediate lord, but as if
 they held in chief of the Crown.[949] The widows of tenants-in-chief
 could not obtain the dowry to which they were legally entitled without
 payment to the king for its assignment,[950] and were forced into
 second marriages against their will.[951] The wardship and marriage
 of minor heirs was given, or sold, by the king to his friends without
 regard to the honesty or dishonesty of the guardian and the interests
 of the minor and his family.[952] By an ingenious piece of intentional
 confusion the Crown arrogated to itself the right of wardship in
 cases where it had no such right. If a man held land of the Crown
 by a non-feudal tenure, and also held other land under another lord
 by knight-service, the distinction between his holding in chief and
 his holding in chivalry was ignored for the king’s benefit, and the
 custody of all the man’s lands was appropriated to the Crown.[953]
 Distraints for debt to the Crown were made in the most arbitrary way;
 the king’s bailiffs would, if it so pleased them or their master,
 seize a debtor’s land instead of his chattels, though the value of
 these latter sufficed to discharge his debt; or they would distrain
 a debtor’s sureties, although he himself was able to pay.[954] When
 a freeman died, they assumed as matter of course that he was in debt
 to the king, and without inquiring to what amount, they seized his
 chattels, to be restored to his executors or next-of-kin only when the
 royal claim was satisfied, and not always then.[955] John, like William
 Rufus, “would be every man’s heir.” If a man died in debt to the Jews,
 and leaving an heir under age, those usurers were suffered to exact
 interest upon their debt during the minority of the heir, so that if
 through the death of the Jewish creditor the debt should fall into the
 king’s hand (the Crown being the legal heir of all Jews), there should
 be as much for the king as possible; and in such cases he claimed
 payment of the uttermost farthing that was set down in the Jew’s
 account-book, although he might thereby leave the Christian debtor’s
 widow and children to starve.[956] Exorbitant tolls were exacted from
 merchants.[957] Fines were laid upon towns for the making of bridges,
 in places where no such obligation had existed in times past.[958]
 Weirs were placed in the rivers that the king might keep to himself
 the profits of fishing.[959] Monasteries not of royal foundation were
 taken into the king’s custody during vacancy, in defiance of the rights
 of their founders’ representatives.[960] The king’s bailiffs compelled
 men to give their corn and other goods for the use of the king or his
 servants, their horses and carts for the carriage of burdens in his
 service, their wood for the construction of his buildings, whether the
 owners were willing or not, and seemingly without payment.[961] Free
 men were arrested, imprisoned, ejected from their lands, even exiled or
 outlawed, without legal warrant or fair trial.[962] Individuals were
 forbidden to enter or quit the realm at the mere will of the king.[963]
 Some barons whom he specially favoured, or wanted to propitiate,
 received licences to impose arbitrary taxes on their sub-tenants,
 without regard to the limits of feudal custom,[964] just as the king
 himself imposed taxes on his subjects according to his will and
 pleasure. In a word, the entire system of government and administration
 set up under the Norman kings and developed under Henry and Richard
 had been converted by the ingenuity of John into a most subtle and
 effective engine of royal extortion, oppression and tyranny over all
 classes of the nation, from earl to villein.
 
 The only class which was as yet capable of making any corporate
 opposition or protest was the baronage; and hitherto the discontent
 of the barons had shown itself only in the resistance of some of
 their number to the king’s demands on certain special occasions and
 in reference to certain special points which affected them personally
 as tenants-in-chief. But there was now one man in England who looked
 at the questions at issue between them and the king from a higher
 standpoint than theirs, and in whose eyes those questions were only
 small parts of a much wider and deeper question, on the solution of
 which he had set his mind from the very hour of his landing in the
 realm. One chronicler relates that John’s first impulse on hearing of
 Archbishop Stephen’s arrival in England had been to withdraw himself
 to some remote place and put off their meeting as long as possible,
 and that he had only been induced to abandon this intention by the
 remonstrances of some of the barons.[965] Whether this particular
 story be true or not, it seems plain that John’s conduct throughout
 his quarrel with the Church was to a great extent dictated by personal
 dislike to the archbishop. This feeling must have been mainly
 instinctive; for the two men had never seen each other till they met at
 Winchester on July 20, 1213. The instinct, however, was a true one: it
 was Stephen Langton who was to give the first impulse to the work which
 was destined--though not till long after he had passed away--to make
 the rule of such a king as John impossible in England for evermore.
 
 The archbishop was determined to be satisfied with nothing short of
 a literal fulfilment of the promise on which he had insisted as a
 condition of the king’s absolution, the promise that to “_all_ men”
 their rights should be restored. He saw that this end could be gained
 only by the instrumentality of the barons; he also saw that it could
 be gained only by a policy based on clearer and firmer, as well as
 broader and nobler, lines than any of them were capable of designing.
 They, indeed, had no definite scheme of policy; nor had they any leader
 able to furnish them with such a scheme. The men of highest standing
 among the magnates, such as the earls of Salisbury, Chester, Albemarle,
 Warren, Cornwall and William the Marshal,--the men of highest standing
 among the official class, such as the heads of the houses of Aubigny,
 Vipont, De Lucy, Basset, Cantelupe, Neville, Brewer[966]--had either
 gone to the war or paid their scutage for it without a murmur, and
 stood utterly aloof from the group of “Northerners,” among whom the
 most conspicuous were two barons of secondary rank, Eustace de Vesci
 and Robert Fitz-Walter. Both Eustace and Robert are said to have had
 just grounds for bitter personal resentment against John; but Robert
 Fitz-Walter had twice already shown himself to be both a traitor and a
 coward; and on the second occasion, in 1212, Eustace de Vesci had done
 the like. The pardon and restoration of both these men in the following
 year was a matter of policy, but was not due to any merits of their
 own.[967] It was not under the inspiration and guidance of such men as
 these that the liberties of the English people could be won, nor even
 that the barons could succeed in their struggle for the privileges,
 pretended or real, of their own order. Another guide offered himself
 to them in the person of Stephen Langton, and offered to them at the
 same time a definite basis of action in the charter of Henry I. Whether
 the offer was made at the meeting in S. Paul’s in August 1213, or at
 some later date and in some other way, is of little consequence; it
 is enough that antecedent probability and after-history alike justify
 the general belief of which Roger of Wendover is the spokesman:--that
 it was Langton who brought to light the charter of which the very
 existence seems to have been forgotten, and it was from him that the
 barons adopted it as the basis of their demands.
 
 The next step which they took in so doing was weightier than,
 probably, they themselves had any idea of. At first glance the charter
 seems to have little or no bearing upon the immediate subject of
 dispute between them and the king; it contains no mention whatever of
 either scutage or military service beyond sea. But it does contain a
 series of clauses regulating the relations between the tenants-in-chief
 and the Crown; and thus it furnished them with a substantial ground
 for insisting that all violations of its provisions on the part of the
 Crown must be redressed before any further burdens could be binding
 upon them. It was even possible for them to argue that any demands on
 the king’s part other than those expressly sanctioned in the charter
 were an encroachment on their privileges as therein defined. For the
 greater purpose which Langton had in view, the value of the charter lay
 in its opening of the way to wider reforms by the incidental clauses
 which bound the tenants-in-chief to extend to their sub-tenants the
 same benefits which they themselves received from the king, and in
 the comprehensive sentence which declared the abolition of “all evil
 customs whereby the realm was unjustly oppressed.”[968] The more
 thoughtful among the confederate barons may perhaps by this time have
 begun to see that, even from a selfish point of view, they had nothing
 to lose, and might have something to gain, by identifying their cause
 with that of the nation as a whole. Many of the grievances which
 touched the lower classes touched the higher also, though not always in
 the same way. Moreover, although the people were as yet powerless to
 initiate any corporate action in their own behalf, their support had
 saved more than one earlier sovereign in a struggle against the barons;
 it might prove no less useful to the barons in a struggle against the
 king. But whatever the barons may have thought about these matters, the
 king was statesman enough to see as clearly as the primate how weighty
 and far-reaching might be the consequences involved in the demand for
 a renewal of the charter. He therefore postponed its discussion till
 after Christmas.[969]
 
 [Sidenote: 1214]
 
 Such is the brief statement of the Barnwell annalist. In its stead,
 Roger of Wendover gives us a dramatic scene in S. Edmund’s abbey.
 “The earls and barons of England,” he tells us, came together in
 that sanctuary, “as if for prayer; but there was something else in
 the matter, for after they had held much secret discourse, there was
 brought forth in their midst the charter of King Henry I., which the
 same barons had received in London, as hath been before said, from
 Archbishop Stephen of Canterbury. Then they went all together to
 the church of S. Edmund the King and Martyr, and beginning with the
 eldest, they swore on the high altar that if the king sought to evade
 their demand for the laws and liberties which that charter contained,
 they would make war upon him and withdraw from fealty to him till he
 should, by a charter furnished with his seal, confirm to them all that
 they demanded. They also agreed that after Christmas they would go all
 together to the king, and ask him for a confirmation of the aforesaid
 liberties; and that meanwhile they would so provide themselves with
 horses and arms that if the king should seek to break his oath, they
 might by seizing his castles compel him to make satisfaction. And when
 these things were done they returned every man to his own home.”[970]
 
 [Sidenote: 1215]
 
 John was at S. Edmund’s on November 4;[971] it is possible therefore
 that his meeting with the barons may have been held there, and that
 the scene described by Roger may have taken place after the king’s
 departure. He kept Christmas at Worcester, and returned to London at
 the opening of the new year.[972] There, at Epiphany, the confederate
 barons came to him in a body, “in somewhat showy military array,” and
 prayed him “that certain laws and liberties of King Edward, with
 other liberties granted to them and to the English Church and realm,
 might be confirmed, as they were written in the charter of King Henry
 I. and the laws aforesaid; moreover they declared that at the time of
 his absolution at Winchester, he had promised those ancient laws and
 liberties, and thus he was bound by his own oath to the observance of
 the same.” John cautiously answered that “the matter which they sought
 was great and difficult, wherefore he asked for a delay till the close
 of Easter, that he might consider how to satisfy both their demands and
 the dignity of his crown.”[973] He then seems to have tried to persuade
 them--no doubt each man singly--into giving him a written promise
 “never again to demand such liberties from him or his successors”; but
 to this no one would consent except the bishop of Winchester, the earl
 of Chester, and William Brewer.[974] At last the proposed adjournment
 till the close of Easter was agreed upon, but not till the king had,
 “against his will,” pledged himself by three sureties to fulfill his
 promise by giving reasonable satisfaction to all parties at the date
 thus appointed.[975]
 
 The king’s sureties were the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishop of
 Ely, and William the Marshal. The choice of the archbishop as one of
 them was good policy on John’s part; and Langton’s acceptance of the
 office implies no wavering or double-dealing on his side. In so far
 as it was his inspiration that gave a new force to the enterprise of
 the barons, by raising it from a struggle for their own privileges
 into a struggle for the liberties of the English nation, he was in
 truth, as Roger of Wendover says, their “chief ally”;[976] and for the
 achievement of its end as he himself conceived it, he did indeed “give
 them his most faithful help to the utmost of his power.” But the help
 which he gave them was not that of a partisan; Stephen Langton was at
 once too true a churchman and too great a statesman, and held too lofty
 a conception of his proper constitutional functions as primate of all
 England, to identify himself with any party. The right and the duty of
 the archbishop of Canterbury was to be the partisan of neither king nor
 people, but the guide and monitor of both, so far as they would accept
 his guidance and listen to his admonitions, and the mediator between
 them whenever mediation was needed. He was by virtue of his office the
 first adviser of the Crown as well as the guardian of the nation’s
 rights; and it was only by standing firmly at his post by the king’s
 side in the former capacity that he could be truly efficient in the
 latter. Langton’s attitude was evidently understood by both parties at
 the time. From the moment when the northern barons first asked the king
 to confirm his great-grandfather’s charter, if not before, John must
 have known that the hand of the primate was with them in the matter.
 But he was quite as much alive as they were to the value of such a
 helper; moreover, he seems to have had the somewhat rare gift of being
 able to recognize in another man qualities which were conspicuously
 absent from his own character. Much as he hated Langton, he evidently
 trusted to his honour and loyalty as implicitly as he trusted to that
 of William the Marshal. He therefore continued to the end the policy
 which he had pursued ever since the archbishop’s coming to England.
 He treated Langton with every mark of confidence and respect; he
 carefully avoided any step which might have forced him into opposition
 on ecclesiastical grounds; and in his diplomatic dealings with the
 barons it was Langton whom he employed as his chief commissioner and
 representative.
 
 The king, however, was even more prompt than the barons in preparing
 to back diplomacy by force. Immediately after the Epiphany meeting he
 ordered a renewal of the oath of allegiance throughout the country; and
 this time it was to be taken in the form of an oath of liege homage,
 binding his subjects to “stand by him against all men.” This, it is
 said, was an unwonted addition, which was generally opposed as being
 “contrary to the charter”--the standard by which all things were now
 tried.[977] It may have been in connexion with this matter that the
 king sent {Feb. 10} to the men of sixteen southern and midland shires
 commissioners “to explain his business” to them;[978] but he ended by
 withdrawing his demand, “not deeming the time opportune for exciting a
 tumult among the people.”[979] That tumults would nevertheless arise
 before long he knew full well; and to meet this danger he had already
 called to his aid the loyal “barons and bachelors” of Poitou.[980]
 The summons must have been issued immediately after, if not even in
 anticipation of, his meeting with the English malcontents at Epiphany,
 and the response must have been as prompt as the summons, for on
 February 8 he had already heard of the arrival in Ireland of some
 troops sent to him by Savaric de Mauléon, and was issuing orders to the
 archbishop of Dublin for the payment of their passage to England.[981]
 On February 19 the king gave a safe-conduct to “the barons of the
 North” that they might come to Oxford to speak with the primate, the
 other bishops and the Earl Marshal on Sunday the 22nd.[982] Whether
 this conference took place, or what came of it, we are not told; but
 on March 13 John wrote to the barons and bachelors of Poitou that
 the matter for which he had summoned them was now settled, and he
 therefore, thanking them for their readiness to obey his call, bade
 those of them who had not yet set out remain at home, and those who had
 started go home again, with the assurance that he would indemnify them
 for their expenses.[983]
 
 It is possible that the barons may have asked for the conference at
 Oxford in order to remonstrate against the warlike preparations of the
 king, and that it may have resulted in some temporary arrangement which
 compelled him to dismiss the Poitevins. It is also possible that this
 dismissal may have been prompted by tidings from Rome. The prospect
 of some such crisis as the present one had almost certainly been in
 the minds of king and barons alike when John performed his homage to
 the Pope; and both alike now sought to make their profit out of that
 transaction, each side appealing to the Pope, as the common overlord
 of both, to use his authority in compelling the other to yield. An
 envoy from John, William Mauclerc, had reached Rome on February 17.
 Eleven days later Eustace de Vesci and two other representatives of
 the malcontent party arrived with letters for the Pope. In these
 letters--so Mauclerc reported to his master--the confederate barons
 besought Innocent, “since he was lord of England,” to urge and, if
 needful, compel the king to restore the ancient liberties granted by
 his predecessors and confirmed by his own oath. They recited how at the
 meeting in London at Epiphany John had not only refused to grant these
 liberties, but had endeavoured to make the petitioners promise never
 to ask for them again. They begged that the Pope would take measures
 to help them in this matter, “forasmuch as he well knew that they
 had at his command boldly opposed the king in behalf of the Church’s
 liberty, and that the king’s grant of an annual revenue and other
 honours to the Pope and the Roman Church had been made not of free
 will and devotion, but from fear and under compulsion from them.”[984]
 Of what John wrote, or charged his envoy to say, to Innocent in his
 behalf, no record remains; but Innocent’s letters show what the tenour
 of John’s argument must have been. With his usual dexterity the king
 made capital out of the secret meetings held, or said to have been
 held, by the malcontents; and he also brought into special prominence
 the one point of discussion which was quite clearly defined, and in
 which he unmistakeably had precedent on his side--the question of the
 scutage. On March 19 Innocent wrote to the archbishop of Canterbury and
 the other English bishops, expressing his surprise that they had not
 checked the quarrel between the king and “certain magnates and barons,”
 and reproving them for their failure to do so; he strongly condemned
 the “conspiracies and conjurations” which the barons were reported to
 have made, and ordered the bishops to quash all such conspiracies and
 urge the barons to proceed only by fair and lawful means. On the other
 hand, he besought the king “to treat the aforesaid nobles graciously,
 and mercifully to grant their just petitions.” On the same day he
 wrote to the barons, informing them of the contents of his letter to
 the bishops.[985] On April 1 he wrote to the barons again, avowedly in
 consequence of the king’s complaint of their refusal to pay the scutage
 for the Poitevin war; he reproved them for their contumacy in this
 matter, and “warned and exhorted” them to satisfy the king’s claims
 without further delay.[986]
 
 [Sidenote: April 19–26]
 
 By the middle of April the two former of these letters must have
 reached England, the second being probably brought back by Eustace
 de Vesci and his companions. The third letter was scarcely needed to
 show the barons that their cause was lost at Rome. John, moreover, had
 secured its ruin in that quarter by taking the Cross[987]--partly, no
 doubt, as a protection against personal violence, but still more as a
 means of enlisting the Pope’s strongest sympathies in his behalf, and
 holding up his enemies to execration as hinderers of the crusade. They
 grew desperate; they held another council among themselves, at which
 they determined, without waiting for their promised interview with the
 king, that they “would deal civilly with him no longer”;[988] and in
 Easter week they assembled at Stamford in arms.
 
 Five earls and forty barons are mentioned by name as present at the
 muster, “with many others”; they all came with horses and arms, and
 brought with them “a countless host,” estimated to comprise about
 two thousand knights, besides other horsemen, sergeants-at-arms, and
 foot soldiers.[989] “And because for the most part they came from the
 north, they were all called Northerners.” From Stamford they marched to
 Northampton, but without doing any act of violence.[990] John, who had
 spent Easter in London,[991] sent the primate and some other bishops
 and magnates to parley with them.[992] Several meetings appear to have
 taken place. The deliberations evidently turned chiefly on the Pope’s
 letters. No allusion is made by the chroniclers to the letter about
 the scutage, which perhaps had not yet arrived; but, on the one hand,
 Innocent’s condemnation of secret conspiracies could not be ignored;
 and on the other, the barons urged his injunction to the king to
 hearken to their “just petitions.”[993] At length John--secure in the
 consciousness that he could refuse every petition on the plea that it
 was not just--authorized his commissioners to demand of the barons, in
 his name, a categorical statement of the laws and liberties which they
 desired.
 
 This message was delivered to the insurgents by the primate and the
 Marshal, at Brackley, on Monday April 27--the day after that originally
 fixed for the meeting of the barons and the king. “Then they [the
 barons] presented to the envoys a certain schedule, which consisted for
 the most part of ancient laws and customs of the realm, declaring that
 if the king did not at once grant these things and confirm them with
 his seal, they would compel him by force.”[994] This “schedule” was no
 doubt a kind of first draft, prepared under the direction of Langton
 himself in his conferences with the insurgents during the previous
 week, of those “Articles of the Barons” from which we chiefly learn the
 grievances of the time, and most of which were ultimately embodied in
 the Great Charter. Langton and the Marshal carried it back to the king,
 who was now in Wiltshire.[995] One by one the articles were read out
 to him by the primate. John listened with a scornful smile: “Why do
 these barons not ask for my kingdom at once?” he said. “Their demands
 are idle dreams, without a shadow of reason.” Then he burst into a
 fury, and swore that he would never grant to them liberties which
 would make himself a slave. In vain the archbishop and the Marshal
 endeavoured to persuade him to yield; he only bade them go back to the
 barons and repeat every word that he had said. They performed their
 errand;[996] and the barons immediately sent to the king a formal
 renunciation of their homage and fealty,[997] and chose for themselves
 a captain-general in the person of Robert Fitz-Walter, to whom they
 gave the title of “Marshal of the army of God and Holy Church.”[998]
 They then marched back to Northampton, occupied the town and laid siege
 to the castle.[999]
 
 The king was not behindhand in his preparations for war. His friends
 were already mustering at Gloucester; on April 30 he requested them
 to proceed thence on the following Monday (May 3), well furnished
 with horses and arms, and with “all the men they could get,” to
 Cirencester, there to await his further commands.[1000] Orders were
 issued for strengthening the fortifications of London, Oxford, Norwich,
 Bristol and Salisbury.[1001] The earls of Salisbury, Warren, Pembroke
 and others perambulated the country to see that the royal castles
 were properly fortified and manned;[1002] help was summoned from
 Flanders[1003] and from Poitou.[1004] Early in May the king returned
 for a couple of days to London;[1005] and as fourteen years before he
 had won the support of its citizens in his struggle with Richard’s
 chancellor by granting to them the “commune” which they desired, so now
 he endeavoured to secure their adhesion by confirming their liberties
 and adding to them the crowning privilege of a fully constituted
 municipality, the right to elect their own mayor every year.[1006]
 Meanwhile the “northern” barons had found Northampton castle too strong
 to be taken without military engines which they did not possess; so
 at the end of a fortnight they had raised the siege and moved on to
 Bedford. Here the castle was given up to them by its commandant,
 William de Beauchamp.[1007] Their forces were rapidly increasing in
 number; the younger men especially, sons and nephews of the greater
 barons, joined them readily, “wishing to make for themselves a name
 in war”; the elder magnates, for the most part, clave to the king “as
 their lord.”[1008]
 
 On May 9 the king--now at Windsor--proposed that the quarrel should
 be decided by eight arbitrators, four to be chosen by himself and
 four by “the barons who are against us,” with the Pope as “superior”
 over them; he offered the earl of Warren and four bishops as sureties
 for his own acceptance of the award, and promised that until it was
 delivered he would take no forcible measures against the insurgents,
 “save according to the law of the realm and the judgement of their
 peers in his court.”[1009] This proposal seems to have been rejected at
 once, for two days later John ordered the sheriffs to seize the lands,
 goods and chattels of “his enemies” in their several shires and apply
 them to his benefit.[1010] Almost immediately afterwards he seems to
 have commissioned the archbishop of Canterbury to negotiate a truce
 for a few days. On the 16th he appointed his brother, Earl William of
 Salisbury, to act as his representative in London.[1011] The object of
 William’s mission evidently was to secure, if possible, the loyalty of
 the “mayor, aldermen and other barons of London,” which John suspected
 to be wavering. His suspicion was correct; a plot for the betrayal of
 the city was already ripe, and on the very next morning--Sunday, May
 17--the insurgents were masters of the capital.[1012] The first use
 they made of this success was to fill their pockets with plunder taken
 from the king’s partisans in the city, and from the Jews; the next was
 to pull down the Jews’ houses and use the stones for repairing the city
 walls. They then sent letters to all the earls, barons and knights who
 still adhered to the king, “bidding them, if they cared to retain their
 property and goods, forsake a king who was perjured and in rebellion
 against his barons, and join with them in standing firmly and fighting
 strongly for the peace and liberty of the realm; threatening that if
 they neglected so to do, they, the writers, would direct their banners
 and their arms against them as against public enemies, and do their
 utmost to overthrow their castles, burn their dwellings, and destroy
 their fishponds, orchards and parks.” These invitations and threats
 brought over to the winning side all who had been waiting to see which
 way the tide would turn, and they, of course, made a right goodly
 company.[1013]
 
 Still the king did not lose heart. He had gone from Berkshire into
 Wiltshire,[1014] and was at his hunting seat of Fremantle--“a house
 which stands on a height, and in the heart of a forest”--when, on May
 18 or 19, a party of Flemish knights under Robert de Béthune found
 their way to him and offered themselves for his service.