Ten months, indeed, had to pass before he could

bring his forces together again ; but when at last “a great

host” gathered at Portsmouth once more, ready to sail on

Whitsun Eve, 1206,” not a voice was raised to oppose its

embarkation. The year had passed without disturbance in

England ; nothing had been seen, nothing further had even

been heard, of the dreaded Flemish and French invasion.

But on the other side of the sea the delay had told. The

fall of Loches, shortly after Easter 1205,” had been followed

on June 23—scarcely a fortnight after the break-up of the

English muster—by that of Chinon,” and this again by the

submission of the viscount of Thouars to the French con-

queror.” Thus the last foothold of the Angevins in Touraine

and on the northern frontier of Poitou were lost. There

remained to John only two fortresses on the northern border

of Poitou–Niort" and La Rochelle, the “fair city of the

waters,” whose natural position made it almost impregnable

even in those days, whither John had twice sent reinforce-

ments," and whose harbour offered a safe and commodious

landing-place for him and his troops.

1 M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 104. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 183,

and R. Coggeshall, p. 156, date Hubert's death July 13; Gerv. Cant., vol. ii.

p. 98, dates it July 12. They all mean the same ; from R. Coggeshall, p. 158,

we learn that the archbishop died shortly after midnight.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 186; exact date from a writ (dated April 29,

1206) ordering the seizure of ships for transport; they are to be at Portsmouth

on Whitsun Eve, or before. Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 62 b, 63. A summons to

the men of the Cinque Ports, for the same date, was issued on May 12 ; ib.

p. 64.

* Rigord, c. 144; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 134; R. Coggeshall,

P. I52.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 154; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 182, 183.

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 135.

° Niort had been taken by, or had surrendered to, Philip, but was regained in

1205 for John by a stratagem of Savaric de Mauléon, whom John had taken

prisoner at Mirebeau and released on a promise of fealty—a promise which was

immediately fulfilled and faithfully kept. See Hist, des Ducs de Normandie,

pp. Ioo-4; and cf. (as to Savaric) R. Coggeshall, p. 146.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 154.

I

1205

I2O6

May 27

1205


On June 7 John arrived at La Rochelle, and met

with an eager welcome ; the vassals of the duchy of

Aquitaine flocked to the standard of Eleanor's heir. Six

days after his landing he could venture as far into Poitou as

the abbey of St. Maixent, half-way between Niort and

Poitiers. The Poitevin counts had for centuries been

benefactors to the abbey, and their descendant was no doubt

sure of a welcome within its walls. He made, however, no

further advance northward ; it was needful, before doing so,

to be quite sure of his footing in the south. From St.

Maixent he went back to Niort, and thence southward

through Saintonge” into Gascony. Here there was known

to be a hostile party whose leaders had congregated in the

castle of Montauban, a mighty fortress which Charles the

Great was said to have besieged for seven years in vain.”

In the middle of July, John formed the siege of Montauban,

and then himself withdrew to Bourg-sur-Mer, a little seaport

at the mouth of the Garonne, while his engines hurled their

missiles against the fortress, till on the fifteenth day a

sufficient breach was made, when “the English soldiery, who

are specially admirable in this work, rushed to scale the

walls, and to give and receive intolerable blows. At last the

Englishmen prevailed, the besieged gave way, and the castle

was taken.” John had probably come back to direct in

person the assault thus successfully made by his brave

“Englishmen,” for he was at Montauban on the day of

its capture, August 1.” With it there fell into his hands,

besides horses and arms and countless other spoil, a number

of prisoners of such importance that we are told he sent a

list of their names to his justiciars in England.” They

evidently included all the Gascon barons whose hostility he

had had reason to fear; and with them in his power, he

could turn his back upon the south without further anxiety.

1206

1 John crossed from Stoke to Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, on May 28, and thence

to La Rochelle on June 7. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 186, where Julii is, of

course, in both places a mistake for /unii; and Itin. a. 8. * /tin. a. 8.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 187. The legend of the building of Montauban

by the “Four Sons of Aymon,” and its siege by Charles, is told in the romance

of Renaus de Montauban.

* Cf. R. Wendover, l.c., and Itin. a. 8.

* R. Wendover, l.c. Unluckily the letter does not seem to be extant.


By August 21 John was back at Niort; after spending

a week there, he proceeded to Montmorillon, on the borders

of Poitou and Berry." At this critical moment Almeric

of Thouars reverted to his old allegiance.” John at once

struck right across Poitou to Clisson,” on the borders of

Anjou and Britanny; Almeric joined him either there or on

the way thither, and they marched together into Anjou. A

chronicler writing in the abbey of S. Aubin at Angers, which

had always been under the special patronage and protection of

John's ancestors, tells how “when the king came to the river

Loire, he found no boats for crossing. Therefore, on the

Wednesday before the Nativity of the Blessed Mary, coming

to the Port Alaschert, and making the sign of the cross over

the water with his hand, he, relying on Divine aid, forded

the river with all his host; which is a marvellous thing to

tell, and such as was never heard of in our time.” With

fire and sword the host fought its way into Angers, and for

a whole week the heir of Fulk the Red held his court in the

home of his forefathers.” He then marched up to Le Lude,

on the border of Maine. On September 20 he was at

Angers again, but left it next day.” On the two following

days he was at Coudray, a few miles south of Saumur;

there, probably, he and Almeric divided their forces, Almeric

moving westward through his own land to attack Britanny.”

while John seems to have gone southward again.” On

I2O6

1 /tin. a. 8.

2 Rigord, c. 147; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 138.

* August 30, Itin. a. 8.

* Cf. Chron. S. Albini, a. 1206; Rigord, c. 147; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c.

138, and Itin. a. 8. This last shows John on September 6 at Chalonnes, and

on the 8th at Angers. “Portus Alaschert,” therefore, must stand for Chalonnes

or some place very near it.

* /tin. a. 8. The Chron. S. Albini, a. 1206, says that before he left the

city he set fire to “the bridge”; which of the two bridges then existing, we are

not told, nor what was his object in destroying it.

6 W. Armor. l.c.

7 The next stage of his Itinerary is “Saint Alemand” (September 23-26),

and the next after that (September 30, October 1) a place whose name is

recorded only in a contracted form (“Bercer',” Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 167 b ;

“Berc’,” Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 74 b) which can hardly represent anything else

than “Berchères” or “Bercières” (Sir T. D. Hardy made it Bercy, but this is

surely impossible). Saint Alemand is probably one of two places now called

Saint-Amand, in the Angoumois. “Tiebauts de Biaumont qui sires estoit de

Bierchières [var. Bercières]” figures among the Aquitanian barons who besieged

Sept. 6


116 JOHN LACKLAND CHAP.

1206 October 3 he was at Thouars, where he stayed a week,"

perhaps to await Almeric's return.

Meanwhile, however, Philip Augustus had assembled

the host of France, and led it as far as the Poitevin

border.” With Philip's personal appearance on the scene

of action, John knew that his own successes were at

an end. Neither Almeric of Thouars, nor the many

barons in the English host who had taken the oath of

allegiance to Philip, would fight against that monarch

in person. While John went on to secure his retreat over

sea by another visit to Niort and La Rochelle,” therefore,

negotiations were set on foot; and when he came back to

Thouars once more, on October 26, it was to proclaim a

truce which had been made between himself and Philip, to

last from October 13 for two years. By its terms each

sovereign was to retain during that period the homage and

services of all those who had attached themselves to him

during the recent war; and any disputes which might arise

about the allegiance of such persons were to be decided by

the judgement of four barons named, two to represent each

of the kings.” Trade, and intercourse of every kind, between

the dominions of John and Philip was to be free, save that

no man, unless he were either a priest or a “known merchant,”

might go to the court of either without special licence, if he

were a subject of the other. Thirteen sureties swore to the

truce on behalf of John, and thirteen on behalf of Philip,

who further undertook that it should be kept by four other

barons whose oaths John had wished to have on his side,

but had apparently been unable to obtain.” Philip's sureties

were headed by “the count of Britanny,” a title which can

only represent Constance's widower, Guy of Thouars, and

thus shows that Arthur's death was now, at any rate, regarded

Savaric de Mauléon at Niort in 1205; Hist, des Ducs de Normandie, p. 102. I

have failed to identify the place, but it was clearly in Aquitaine.

1 Itin. a. 8.

* Rigord, c. 147; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 139.

8 /tin. a. 8.

* Ralf (of Lusignan), count of Eu, and Hugh, viscount of Châtelheraut, for

Philip ; Savaric de Mauléon and William of Chantemerle for John.

* William des Roches, Maurice of Craon, William of Guerches, and Geoffrey

of Ancenis. This promise seems to have been made by Philip in person.


III JOHN “soft's WORD." I 17

as certain. The first of John's sureties was Guy's brother,

Almeric, the viscount of Thouars, whose action had for

several years past generally turned the scale between the

rival sovereigns in Poitou, and who by the terms of the

truce was pledged to his present allegiance for the next two

years at least. The other sureties on both sides were nearly

all of them barons of Aquitaine;” those of the Angevin

counties seem for the most part to have stood aloof. It is

clear, however, that John had secured a firm hold on the

southern provinces, and to a considerable extent regained a

hold upon Poitou. On the whole, therefore, his expedition

had been successful. The best proof of its success lies in

Philip's readiness to accept such a truce, without making

any attempt to regain the ground which he had lost in

Poitou, though he was actually in the land with an army

at his back. As for John, he was going home to his island

realm to prepare for a fight of another kind, and with an

adversary of a character very different from that of Philip

Augustus.

* See the truce in Duchesne, Hist. Morm Scripti. pp. 1061-2, and Foedera,

vol. i. pt. i. p. 95.

1206


1205

CHAPTER IV

KING JOHN

1206–12 Io

Sed processu temporis mollities illa in tantam crudelitatem versa est, ut nulli

praedecessorum suorum coaequari valeret, ut in sequentibus patebit.—GERv.

CANT. ii. 93.

THE first business wherein John had an opportunity of

exercising the free kingship which he had, as he said,

acquired by the death of Hubert Walter, was the appoint-

ment of Hubert's successor. Immediately after Hubert’s

funeral the king spent six days at Canterbury." He “talked

much and graciously with the monks” of Christ Church about

the choice of a new archbishop, and even hinted that one might

be found in their own ranks. At the same time, however,

he took possession of a valuable set of church plate be-

queathed by Hubert to his cathedral;” and before leaving

Canterbury he issued orders that the election of the primate

$hould be made on November 30 by the monks and the

bishops of the province conjointly.” A party in the chapter

at once resolved to vindicate its independence both against

the bishops, whose claim to share in the choice of their

metropolitan was always opposed by the monks, and against

the king, whose prerogative of designating the candidate to

be chosen was in theory regarded by monks and bishops

alike as uncanonical, though in practice they had been

* July 15-20, 1205, Itin. a. 7.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 98. Cf. Aot. Pat. vol. i. p. 60, 60 b.

* Cf. Innoc. III. Epp. 1. viii. No. 161, and Gerv. Cant. l.c.

I 18


CHAP. IV KING JOHN II9

compelled to submit to it at every vacancy for a hundred

years past at the least. The younger and more hot-headed

members of the chapter privately elected their sub-prior

Reginald, enthroned him at dead of night, and hurried him

off to seek confirmation from the Pope, pledging him to

secrecy till the confirmation should be secured." The older

and more prudent brethren evidently connived at these

proceedings without taking part in them. Their policy was

to consent to Reginald's election after the fact, if the Pope's

sanction of it could be obtained ; but if this were refused,

they could repudiate the election as a matter in which they

had had no share. The convent was, however, unlucky in

its choice of a champion. Reginald was no sooner across the

sea than he began to announce himself publicly as “the elect

of Canterbury,” and even to show the credentials which he

had received from his brethren for the Pope. Of course

this news soon reached England, and caused a great com-

motion in high places there. The bishops, indignant at

being tricked out of their share in the election, despatched

an appeal to Rome. The monks sent a counter-appeal;”

but to them the wrath of the king was far more terrible than

the wrath of the bishops, or even the possible wrath of the

Pope. Long before the appeals could be decided, they sent

to John a deputation charged with a communication con-

taining no allusion whatever to Reginald, but simply

requesting that the convent might be permitted to choose

for itself a pastor. John received the deputies graciously

and assented to their request; then, taking them aside,

he “pointed out to them that the bishop of Norwich"

(John de Grey) “was attached to him by a great intimacy,

and the only one among the prelates of England who

knew his private affairs,” wherefore it would be greatly

for the advantage of king and kingdom if he became

archbishop—a consummation which the king begged the

deputies would do their utmost to secure. He sent

back with them some confidential clerks of his own to

assist them in this task, and dismissed them with a

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 183. Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 99.

* Innoc. III. Epp. 1. viii. No. 161.

1205


1205 promise of bestowing great honour on their convent if it were

accommodating in this matter. The result was an unanimous

election of John de Grey by the chapter of Christ Church."

On December 6 the king obtained from both bishops

and monks a withdrawal of their respective appeals.” On

December 11 John de Grey was enthroned at Canterbury

in the king's presence, and invested by him with the tem-

poralities of the See; and on the 18th the king despatched

a messenger to ask for the papal confirmation of the new

primate's appointment.” The Pope, however, at the end

1206 of March 1206, decided that the election of John de Grey

was uncanonical; on the validity of Reginald's election he

suspended his judgement, ordering the Canterbury chapter

to send sixteen of their number to him by October 1,

with full powers to act on behalf of all, and if necessary to

hold a new election in his court. The suffragans of the

province were desired to send proctors, and the king was

invited to do the like." The king sent three proctors;"

the bishops seem to have contented themselves with writing

a joint letter, of whose contents we know nothing, except

that they had the royal approval." Of the sixteen monks

who went as representatives of the chapter, twelve, before

they sailed, secretly exchanged a promise with the king.

He pledged himself to ratify whatever they should do at

Rome; they pledged themselves to do nothing there except

re-elect John de Grey." The assembly at Rome, originally

appointed for October 1, was postponed till the last week

of Advent (December 17 to 24). Then, in full con-

sistory, the Pope, after examination, set aside the claim of

the bishops to a voice in the election, and declared the

monks to be the sole rightful electors; but he also set

aside, as informal and void, their election of their sub-

prior, Reginald ; and he bade them elect, then and there,

R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 184, 185.

Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 56 b.

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 185; Rot. Pat. l.c.

Innoc. III. Epp. l. ix. Nos. 34, 35, 36.

Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 65 b, 67. * Ib. p. 64.

M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 111 : Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 514. Cf.

W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 197, 198.

:


“whomsoever they would, so he were but an earnest and

capable man, and above all, an Englishman.” All eyes

must have turned instinctively upon the English-born

Cardinal-priest of S. Chrysogonus, the most illustrious

teacher of theology in his day, “than whom there was no

man greater in the Roman court, nor was there any equal

to him in character and learning”—Stephen Langton.

Innocent was but speaking the thought of the whole

assembly when he added that the monks could not do

better than choose Stephen. The unlucky twelve were as

willing to do so as the other four, but felt tied by their

compact with the king. After some shuffling, they con-

fessed their difficulty to the Pope. He scornfully absolved

them from their shameful promise, and the sixteen monks

unanimously elected Stephen Langton. The king's proctors,

however, refused to ratify the election in John's name; so

Innocent at once wrote to request a formal ratification of

it from John himself."

These things were done in the week following John's

return from La Rochelle to England, which took place on

December 12.” His recent experiences had shown him

that the recovery of his lost territories was by no means

impossible, but that it could not, under existing political

and social conditions, be achieved by means of the only

forces which the military organization of his own realm

could supply. Those forces must be supplemented, if not

superseded, in any attempt at the reconquest of the Norman

and Angevin dominions, by the employment of mercenaries

on a large scale, and by an elaborate system of diplomacy,

the gradual knitting together of a complicated scheme of

foreign alliances. For both these purposes the first need

was money; and the difficulties with which the king had

to contend in his efforts to raise money were as much

greater in John's case than in that of any of his predecessors,

as his need was greater than theirs had ever been.

1. Cf. Innoc. III. Epp. l. ix. No. 206; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 212,

213; M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. pp. 111, 112 ; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p.

198; Ann. Burton, a. 1211.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 188; R. Coggeshall, p. 156.

1206


__

_`

I 194-1207 The financial difficulties of the Crown had been accumu-

lating ever since Richard's captivity. At John's accession

the arrears of taxes were enormous. At Michaelmas 12 or

arrears of all the three “scutages of Normandy” imposed

under Richard—in 1194, I 195 and I 196—were due from

almost every shire; hidage “for the king's ransom" was

still owing from Dorset and Somerset, and there were many

arrears even of the “scutage of Wales,” which dated from

I 190." Some of these debts ran on as late as 1207, and

some much later still. The king's claim to these unpaid

taxes, as well as to all other debts owed to his predecessor,

was, of course, never withdrawn. A grotesque instance of

the way in which the principle of inheritance might some-

times work in such matters occurs in the treasury roll of

I2O I, where two men in Devon are set down as owing a

fine “because they had been with Count John ”*—that is,

because they had supported, in his rebellion against Richard

in 1193, the very man for whom, as king, the fine was

now claimed. The Crown had, however, no direct means

of enforcing payment of either fines or taxes, at any rate

in the case of the barons. Its one remedy was to seize

the lands or castles of an obstinate and wilful defaulter ;

and this remedy was fraught with danger to the crown

itself. Neither law nor custom defined the circumstances

or fixed the limits of time within which a defaulter was

not, and beyond which he was, liable to be treated as

obstinate and wilful; in every case where the king exercised

his right of seizure on this ground, therefore, the defaulter

and his friends could always find a plea for denouncing its

exercise as arbitrary and unjust. 