It seems probable that

at the close of Richard's reign his ministers may have thus

seized the castles or lands of certain barons in pledge for

the arrears of their dues to the crown, and that this may

have been one of the grievances referred to in the demand

of the barons that Richard's successor “should restore to

each of them his rights.” John's demand for the castles of

some of the barons in I2O I was in all likelihood a pro-

* Chancellor’s Roll, 3 John (1201), passim. * Ib. p. 18.


ceeding of the same kind, based on the same ground, and, 1199-1207

as it seems, equally ineffectual in compelling payment; all

that the king obtained was the surrender not indeed of

the castles, but of some of the barons' sons as hostages.

The deadlock was probably inevitable; but every year of

its continuance aggravated both the financial difficulties of

the government, and the unfriendliness of the relations

between the barons and the king; and this latter evil

was yet further aggravated by the measures which had

necessarily to be taken in order to meet the former one.

Plunged as he was from the very moment of his accession

in a costly struggle with France, John had been forced to

lay continually fresh burdens upon that very class among

his subjects who already were, or considered themselves to

be, overburdened by the demands of his predecessor. The

“first scutage of King John ” seems to have been assessed

immediately after his coronation; it appears in the Pipe

Roll made up at Michaelmas 1199. In the financial year

ending at Michaelmas 1201, and in every one of the five

following years, there was another new scutage;" and these

scutages were independent of the fines paid by the barons

who did not accompany the king on his first return to

Normandy in I 199, of the money taken from the host

as a substitute for its service in 1201, of the equipment

and payment of the “decimated" knights in 1205, and the

* A summary of the scutages was drawn up, from the Pipe Rolls, by -

Alexander Swereford, in the time of Henry III., and is printed in the Rolls

edition of the Red Book of the Exchequer. The marginal dates added in that

edition are wrong throughout John's reign. The true dates are as follows:—

First scutage of John, “in rotulo primo” (1198-1199), 2 marks.

Second scutage, “in rotulo tertio’” (1200-12o.1), 2 marks.

Third scutage, “in rotulo quarto” (1201-1202), 2 marks.

Fourth scutage, “in rotulo quinto * (1202-1203), 2 marks.

Fifth scutage, “in rotulo sexto.” (I2O3-I2O4), 2 marks.

Sixth scutage, “in rotulo septimo” (1204-1205), 2 marks.

Seventh scutage, “in rotulo octavo '' (1205-1206), 20 s.

Eighth scutage, “in rotulo duodecimo” (1209-12 Io), 2 marks.

*** (for U. in rotulo decimo tertio” (1210-1211), 2 marks.

>

T - - -

* (for \,, in rotulo decimo tertio” (1210-1211), 20 s.

*

Eleventh scutage, “in rotulo decimo sexto” (1213-1214), 3 marks.

A'ed Book of the Exchequer, vol. i. pp. 11, 12.


1200-1207 fines claimed from all the tenants-in-chivalry after the

dismissal of the host in the same year, as well as of

the actual services which many of those who had paid

the scutage rendered in the campaigns of 1202–1204 and

I 206.

The other taxes levied during these years were a

carucage in 12oo” and a seventh of moveables in I2O4.”

But all the while arrears went on accumulating, and year

after year a budget had to be made up by devices of the

most miscellaneous character. The accession of a new king

could, of course, easily be made a pretext for selling con-

firmations of existing rights and privileges, and John availed

himself of this pretext to the uttermost of his power at the

earliest opportunity—that is, on his visit to England in

1201. During that time nobody in England seems to have

felt secure of anything that he possessed till he had bought

it of the king. Individuals of various ranks bought the

sovereign’s “peace” or his “goodwill”;” the cities of Win-

chester and Southampton and the county of Hants each

gave him money “that they might be lovingly treated ”; *

Wiltshire gave him twenty pounds “that it might be well

treated.”" The citizens of York offended him by omitting

to welcome him with a procession when he visited their city,

and to provide quarters for his cross-bowmen ; he demanded

hostages for their future good behaviour, but afterwards

changed his demand to a fine of a hundred pounds." The

sale of offices went on as of old ;" while the sale of charters to

towns, which under Richard was already becoming a remark-

able item in the royal accounts, was a transaction of yet

greater frequency and importance under his successor.” On

the other hand, John's treasury rolls contain many notices

of persons who owe the king money “which he has lent

them.” These loans from the king to his barons and other

R. Coggeshall, p. Ioo. See above, p. 73.

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 173. See above, p. 101.

Chancellor's Roll, 3 John, passim.

Ib. p. 249. * Ib. p. 228. * Ib. p. 3oo.

E.g. in 1201 William de Stuteville gave 4, 1ooo to be sheriff of Yorkshire;

299.

See the printed Rotuli Cartarum.

ib.

:


subjects were probably made chiefly in the hope of securing 1200-1207

the fidelity of the borrowers. In one way or another the

speculation must have been in most cases a paying one for

John. The privilege of claiming interest in hard cash for

a loan was indeed reserved exclusively for the Jews, and

not shared even by the king; but he could take from his

debtors ample security on their lands or castles, or by

means of hostages who were usually their sons or

other young members of their families, and whom it was

of the greater importance for him to hold in his power

as his relations with the barons grew more strained year

by year.

In 1206 the tension had reached such a point that John

did not venture to impose a scutage of the full amount—

two marks on the knight's fee—which had been usual since

his father's time, but contented himself with twenty shillings."

In 1207 he evidently dared not attempt to levy any fresh

scutage at all. Nor was a carucage likely to prove either

less unpopular or more productive; for the agricultural

interest of the country was in a state of extreme depression,

owing to a long succession of bad seasons; while the taxa-

tion of moveables was an expedient which seems to have

found, as yet, but little favour with either the people or

the government. John now put forth a suggestion which

was, so far as we can see, a novelty in English finance.

He “held a council in London on January 8, and there

requested the bishops and abbots that they would allow

parsons and others holding ecclesiastical benefices to give to

the king a fixed sum from their revenues.”* Neither in

equity nor in policy was the idea a bad one. While the

military tenants and the socage tenants had each their own

peculiar burden—scutage in the one case, carucage in the

other—the beneficed clergy, as such, had never yet been

subjected to taxation. The king might well argue that it

was time for them to take their turn in making a special

contribution to the financial needs of the State; and the

argument was sure to meet with the approval of the laity.

The prelates, however, were unwilling; and the question

1 Red Book, vol. i. p. 11. * Ann. Waverley, a. 1207.

1207


1207

was adjourned to another council, in which “an infinite

multitude” of ecclesiastical and temporal magnates came

together at Oxford on February 9.

At this second meeting the bishops of both provinces

gave it as their final answer that “the English Church could

by no means submit to a demand which had never been

heard of in all previous ages.”" The only approach to a

precedent for it, indeed, had occurred in 1194, when Arch-

bishop Geoffrey of York, eager to collect money for Richard's

ransom, had asked the canons of his cathedral chapter to

give for that purpose a fourth part of their revenues for the

year, with the result that they accused him of “wanting to

overthrow the liberties of their church,” and shut its doors

in his face.” Between the council in London and that at

Oxford, Geoffrey and John, who had been more or less at

variance ever since the latter's accession, were formally

reconciled;" John therefore probably counted upon Geoffrey's

support of his scheme, and he may have hoped that the

suffragans of Canterbury, having no metropolitan of their

own to lead them, would not venture to stand out against

the northern primate and the king with the barons, for once,

at his back. But what Geoffrey had himself asked of his

own chapter as a special favour to Richard in a wholly

exceptional emergency, he had no mind to give leave for John

to claim from all the beneficed clergy of his province

as a matter of right, and under entirely different circum-

stances. The king was prudent enough not to press his

demand; but it may be doubted whether the lay barons

agreed with the Waverley annalist in deeming its with-

drawal a proof that he “had taken wiser counsel,” since

he substituted for it a demand for a thirteenth of the move-

able goods of every layman throughout the realm." This

1 Ann. Waverley, a. I2O7. * R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 222, 223.

3. On January 25, at Worcester. Æot. Pat. vol. i. p. 58 b.

* Ann. Waverl. a. 1207. R. Wendover (iii. 210) represents the thirteenth

as exacted from both laity and clergy; the Waverley Annals say merely

“omnis homo de cujuscunque feodo.” But the writ for the assessment, issued

from Oxford on February 17, says “concessum est quod quilibet laicus homo totius

Angliae, de cujusque feodosit,” etc. (Aot. Pat. vol. i. p. 72 b). This would, of

course, include laymen holding lands of ecclesiastical superiors (cf. Rot. Claus,

vol. i. p. 84 b). Geoffrey's protest must therefore be interpreted accordingly.


they had no excuse for refusing. “All murmured, but no

man dared contradict,”’ except Geoffrey of York. He, it

seems, claimed exemption for laymen holding lands of the

Church, or at least of his cathedral church. His protest,

however, was disregarded ; whereupon he excommunicated

all spoilers of the Church in general, and of the province of

York in particular, and then withdrew over sea,” to spend

the rest of his life in exile.

Thus for the next eight years the vast diocese of York

was practically without a chief pastor and the province

without a metropolitan, while the temporalities of the see

were in the hand of the king. As for Canterbury, John had

answered the Pope's request that he would ratify the election

of Stephen Langton by a flat refusal to accept as primate a

man of whom he declared that he “knew nothing, save that

he had dwelt much among his enemies”;” and when on June

17 Stephen was consecrated by Innocent,” the king seized

the estates of the Canterbury chapter, drove the monks into

exile,” and proclaimed that any one who acknowledged

Stephen as archbishop should be accounted a public enemy.”

In August Innocent bade the bishops of London, Ely and

Worcester threaten the king, if he continued obstinate, with

an interdict upon his realm, and hinted that this might be

followed by a papal excommunication of John himself."

Negotiations went on throughout the winter, but without

result.* and on Passion Sunday, March 23, or Monday, March

24, 1208, the interdict was proclaimed.” It seems that

John, it seems, had not yet abandoned all hope of getting something from the

beneficed clergy; on May 26 he asked those of the southern province for

something very like a “benevolence.” Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 72.

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 210.

* Ib. Cf. Ann. Waverl. a 1207.

8 Innoc. III. Epp. l. x. No. 219 ; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 215-217.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 213.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 199; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 214. The writ for

seizure of the estates was issued July 11, Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 74; and executed

July 15, Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. Ioo.

° W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 199.

7 Innoc. III. Epp. l. x. No. 113.

* Ib. Nos. 159, 16o; Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 78, 8o; R. Wendover, vol. iii.

pp. 220, 22I.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. IoI, and the Annals of Waverley, Worcester,

Bermondsey and Tewkesbury, a. 1207, date the publication of the interdict March

1207

1208

an


notice of the intended date of its publication was given about

a week before, and that the king at first answered this notice

by ordering all the property of the clergy, secular or monastic,

to be confiscated on Monday, March 24; but that he

immediately afterwards decided to anticipate, instead of

returning, the blow, and caused the confiscation to be begun

at once." For him the opportunity was a golden one. The

interdict enabled him to put the whole body of the clergy in

a dilemma from which there was no escape. They held their

property—thus he evidently argued—on condition of per-

forming certain functions: if they ceased from those functions,

their property was forfeit, just as that of a layman was forfeit

if he withheld the service with which it was charged. The

logical consequence in either case—from John's point of view

—was confiscation ; difficult and dangerous to enforce on

a wide scale against laymen, but easy and safe when the

victims were clergy. The barons made no objection to a

proceeding which would fill the king's coffers without drawing

a single penny from their own ; the chief justiciar himself,

Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, earl of Essex, had no scruple in acting

as custos for the Crown of all the Church property on his

own estates, which were scattered through thirty-one counties,

and also of the revenues and goods of the Templars through-

out all England.” The spoliation was indeed effected with

a brutal violence which would have been impossible had there

been any strong feeling against it among the influential

1208

24; the Ann. Winton. date it “Monday in Passion Week,” i.e. March 24

also. The Annals of Margan and of Dunstable make it Passion Sunday, i.e.

March 23, which is the date given by R. Wendover (iii. 222), W. Coventry

(ii. 199) and T. Wykes (a. 1207). Roger of Wendover, however, adds that it

was the Monday in Passion Week, so his dates are self-contradictory.

1. R. Coggeshall, p. 163, says the general confiscation of clerical property took

place on March 24; and the king's orders (issued March 17 and 18) for

the seizure of the sees of Bath and Ely are to take effect from that day (Rot. Pat.

vol. i. p. 80, 8o b), which looks as if the confiscation was meant to be an im-

mediate retort to the interdict. But the see of Norwich—though its bishop was

the king's favourite John de Grey—was evidently seized before March 23 (ib. p.

81); while the sheriffs of Derbyshire and Warwickshire were already holding for

the king “all the manors of the bishop of Chester within their bailiwicks, and

everything in them, and all the lands and goods of abbots, priors, religious, and

clerks, within their bailiwicks,” as early as March 21, for on that day they were

ordered to hand them over to another custodian. Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 107.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 107, I Io.


classes of the laity," and which so far outran the intentions

of the king that on April I I he issued a proclamation

ordering that any man caught doing or even speaking evil

to a monk or a clerk, “contrary to our peace,” should be

hanged upon the nearest oak.” The clergy, like the Jews, were

to be ill-treated by no one save the king himself. Many of

them made a compromise with their spoiler; within a very

few weeks five bishops, three cathedral chapters, the prior

of the Hospitallers, and the heads of fourteen important

monasteries, besides sundry individual priests, undertook

to farm their own benefices and other property for the

king.” The Cistercians, asserting that the privileges of their

order exempted them from interdict, ceased from performing

the offices of religion for a few days only, and then resumed

them as usual ; * whereupon their possessions, which had

been seized like those of the other orders, were restored to

them on April 4.”

At the same time John despatched an envoy to Rome

proposing terms on which he professed himself willing to let

Stephen take possession of his see ; and he contrived to spin

out the negotiations for six months before Innocent discovered

that the terms offered were merely a device for wasting time,

and that the king had never intended to fulfil them.” On

* R. Coggeshall, p. 163; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 223. The Ann. Margan.,

a. I2O7, give a curious and not very intelligible account of the state of public

feeling on the question between John and the Pope : “Electus est Magister S. de

Langetone ad archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem . . . Pro cujus electione, quia

facta fuit contra profanas illas consuetudines quas vocant avitas leges et regias

libertates, orta est statim discordia inter Papam Innocentium et Johannem tyrannum

Angliae, faventibus ei” (Stephen, Innocent, or John P) “et consentientibus

omnibus laicis et clericis fere universis, sed et viris cujuslibet professionis multis.”

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 111. * Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 108-13 b.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 226. * Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 108 b.

* John proposed, instead of himself giving Langton the regalia of the see, to

place them in the Pope's hands and let him confer them on the archbishop, inas-

much as John “could not yet bring himself to receive Stephen as a friend.”

The Pope, though he did not like the scheme, yet authorized the bishops of

London, Ely and Worcester to receive the regalia as his representatives and to

confer them as the king desired; but whenever the bishops sought an interview

with the king on the subject, he put them off. At last, in September (1208), he

gave Langton himself a safe-conduct for a week's visit to England, but addressed

it to “S. de Langton, Cardinal,” thus showing that he did not yet intend to

recognize him as archbishop. Langton of course declined to come on such terms.

See Innoc. III. Epp. 1. xi. Nos. 89, 9o; Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 82,85, 86; Ann.

Wazer!. a. I2O8.

K

1209


January 12, 1209, the Pope informed the bishops of

London, Ely and Worcester that he had written to John a

letter of which he sent them a copy, and bade them excom-

municate the king if he did not repent within three months

after its receipt." John upon this began a fresh series of

negotiations, which kept the three bishops—who had appar-

ently gone over sea immediately after publishing the inter-

dict—flitting to and fro between the continent and England,

without any result, for nine more months. In October they

finally withdrew, but without publishing the excommunica-

tion; and by the end of the year all possibility of its

publication in England had vanished, for every English

bishop had fled save two, Peter des Roches, bishop of

Winchester, and John de Grey, bishop of Norwich, both of

whom were creatures of the king; John de Grey, moreover,

was now justiciar in Ireland, and the Poitevin Peter des

Roches was thus left sole representative of the episcopal .

order in England.” A -

It was John's hour of triumph, not over the clergy alone,

but over all his subjects and vassals within the four seas of

Britain. The action of the Pope and the inaction of the

barons had opened a way for him to make himself “King of

England” in his own sense of the words. To all outward

seeming his whole time, since his return from the continent,

had been devoted to mere amusement and self-indulgence.

He “haunted woods and streams, and greatly did he delight

in the pleasure of them.”* When he was not thus chasing

1209

1 Innoc. III. Epp. 1. xi. No. 211.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 89, 9o; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 222, 228, 229 ;

Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. Ioo, Io:3, Ioq ; Ann. Waverl, and Dunst. a. 1208. All

the chroniclers have confused the dates, which have to be rectified by the help of

the Pope's letters, the Patent and Close Rolls (both of which, however, unluckily

fail in 1209), and Bishop Stubbs's notes to Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. 103, IoA,

appendix to preface, ib. pp. xci-cviii, and W. Coventry, vol. ii. preface, pp. lv.,

lvi. The sees of Chichester, Exeter, Lincoln and Durham were vacant; before

June 21, 1209, Hugh of Wells was elected to Lincoln by desire of the king, who

sent him to Normandy to be consecrated by the archbishop of Rouen, but he

went to the archbishop of Canterbury instead, and was consecrated by him on

December 20 (R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 231 ; date from M. Paris, Hist. Angl.

vol. ii. p. 12o, note 4). Carlisle had been administered since 1203 by Bernard,

the exiled archbishop of Ragusa. Coventry (or Chester) was vacated in October

1208 by the death of Geoffrey Muschamp, who is mentioned by Gervase among

the bishops who went over sea. * Hist, des Ducs de Mormandie, p. Io9.


the beasts of the forest, his yet more relentless pursuit of

other prey was making havoc of the domestic peace, and

rousing against him the deadly hatred, of some of the greatest

of his barons." But their hatred was futile; they were para-

lyzed partly by their own mutual jealousies, which the king

was continually stirring up,” partly by the consequence of

their selfish shortsightedness with regard to his persecution

of the clergy. The interdict had placed one whole estate of

the realm at John's mercy; and the laity, having failed at

the critical moment to make common cause with their

clerical brethren, now found themselves in their turn without

a support against his tyranny. His consciousness of power

broke out in the strangest freaks of wantonness; in causing

the Michaelmas session of the Exchequer to be held at

Northampton instead of London, “out of hatred to the

Londoners”; * in forbidding the capture of birds all over

England; * in ordering that throughout the Forest districts

the hedges should be fired and the ditches made by

the people to protect their fields should be levelled, “so

that, while men starved, the beasts might fatten upon

the crops and fruits.” It showed itself too in acts of graver

political significance. A series of orders to the bailiffs of

the coast towns for the equipment and mustering of their

ships and the seizure of foreign vessels, issued in the spring

and summer of 1208, indicates that John was then either

meditating another expedition over sea, or, more probably,

expecting an attack from thence. The muster, originally

fixed for Trinity Sunday, was postponed to S. Matthew's

day,” and the end of the matter was that John, finding he

* The two best known instances indeed are of doubtful authenticity; see Note

II. at end. But the general change against John rests upon authorities which

there is no reason to question; Hist, des Ducs, pp. 105, 200, and R. Wendover,

vol. iii. p. 240. The list of John's children given by Pauli, Gesch. von

Ængland, vol. iii. p. 475, is neither correct nor complete.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 105.

* M. Paris records this twice, in 1208 (Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 524) and

1209 (Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 118). One of the two dates is probably wrong, but

there is no means of deciding which.

* Christmas 1208, R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 225.

* June 28, 1209; ib. p. 227; M. Paris, Hist, Angl, vol. ii. p. 119. Cf.

Hist, des Ducs, p. 109.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 80, 81 b, 83 b-86.

I209

1208

4


had no immediate need for the services of the fleet, “took

occasion”—no doubt on pretext of some deficiency in the

contingent due from them—“to oppress the mariners of the

Cinque Ports with great and heavy affliction. Some he

hanged ; some he killed with the sword ; many were im-

prisoned and loaded with irons"; the rest fled into exile, and

it was only by giving him fines and hostages that they

appeased his wrath and bought his leave to return to their

homes." The barons were again required to renew their

homage; the demand was made literally at the sword's point

—for John's lavish hospitality and largesse * filled his court

with mercenaries who were quite ready to enforce his will in

such a matter—and they were compelled either to submit to

it, or to give their sons and kinsmen as hostages for their

fidelity.” The king seemed indeed, as Matthew Paris says,

to be courting the hatred of every class of his subjects.”

But hate him as much as they might, they feared him yet

more than they hated him ; and “burdensome" as he was “to

both rich and poor,” “when he summoned all the free tenants

throughout the realm, of whatever condition, who were above

the age of twelve years, to swear fealty in person to him and

his infant heir in the autumn of 1209, rich and poor alike

durst not do otherwise than obey him.”

This ceremony took place at Marlborough in Sept-

ember, just before the final rupture of the negotiations

with Langton and the bishops. A few weeks earlier John

had received the submission of the king of Scots. Twice or

thrice in the last two years a visit of William the Lion to

the English court had been projected.” It took place at

length in the middle of April 1209 at Bolton, whence John

and William proceeded together to Norham for a confer-

1208

1209

1. Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 102, and Ann. Dunst. a. 1208.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 105.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 224.

* M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 118.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 227.

* Cf. ib., Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 104 (who makes the age fiftéen years), and

W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 200.

* Gerv. Cant. l.c. The day must have been either the 13th or the 30th,

Itin. a. II.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 90 (Aug. 1207); Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 76 (Oct.

1207); ib. p. 91 (April 1209).


ence." The shelter given in Scotland to some of the bishops

and other persons who fled from John's persecution in con-

nection with the interdict” supplied the English king with

a pretext for demanding, once for all, security for William's

loyalty. He bade him surrender either three castles on

the border or his only son as a hostage. William refused

to do either.” John, on returning to the south, summoned

his host, and in July set out to take the three castles by

force. The papal excommunication was hanging over his

head, and its publication was hourly expected ; his troops

shrank alike from his leadership and from an encounter with

the Scot king, who was considered “eminent for his piety,”

the champion of the Church and the favourite of Heaven,

while they, being under interdict, were virtually outcasts

from the Christian fold. A dexterous renewal of negotia-

tions with Innocent and Stephen, however, staved off the

excommunication and prevented the threatened desertion

of the English troops; * and on August 4 John was at

Norham" at the head of a great host ready to do battle

with the Scots. On hearing this, William “greatly feared

his attack, knowing him to be given to every kind of

cruelty; so he came to meet him and offered to treat for

peace; but the king of the English flew into a rage and

insulted him bitterly, reproaching him with having received

his (John's) fugitives and public enemies into his realm, and

lent them countenance and help against him.” At last

some “friends of both realms” arranged terms which pacified

John and which William dared not refuse. He sent his

son, not indeed as a hostage, but to do homage to the

English king “for the aforesaid castles and other lands

which he held ";" he undertook to pay John by instalments

within the next two years fifteen thousand marks “to have

* Chron. Mailros, a. 1209.

* The Ann. Dunst., a. 1208, say the bishops of Salisbury and Rochester

went to Scotland “cum Regis Angliae gratia”; but cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p.

Ioo, and R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 226. Langton's father had taken refuge at

St. Andrews in 1207. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii., appendix to preface, pp. lxii, lxiii.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 102.

* Ib. pp. 102-3. Cf. appendix to preface, ib. pp. c-ciii.

* Itin. a. 11.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 103.

1209

Aug. 7




I34 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

1209

his goodwill”; he gave hostages for the fulfilment of this

undertaking; and he surrendered his two daughters to be

kept in John's custody as his wards and married at his

pleasure." According to Gervase of Canterbury, one of

these ladies was to be married to John's son; *...one of his

many illegitimate sons must be meant, for though John had

now two sons by his queen, the elder of them was not yet

two years old, while the younger of William's daughters was

thirteen at the least.* All that William obtained in return

for these concessions was the freedom of the port of Ber-

wick, and leave to pull down a castle which the bishop of

Durham had built over against it." Of his claim upon

Cumberland and Westmorland nothing further was ever

heard.

Two months later, Wales followed Scotland's example.

Over Wales, indeed, John's triumph was won without the

trouble even of a military demonstration on his part. The

anarchy of Wales had been growing worse and worse ever

since the death of Henry II. Its danger for England lay

mainly in the opportunities which it afforded to any of the

English barons of the border who might be treasonably

inclined, for making alliances with one or other of the

warring Welsh princes, and thus securing for themselves a

support which might enable them to set at defiance the

authority of the English crown. John himself had held the

position of a border baron for ten years, as earl of Glou-

cester and lord of Glamorgan, and had used it for his own

private ends as unscrupulously as any of his neighbours.”

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 103. The Scottish authorities, Chron. Mailros

and Chron. Lanercost, a. 1209, make the sum thirteen thousand pounds. R.

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 227, says twelve thousand marks, and M. Paris, Chron.

Maj. vol. ii. p. 525, eleven thousand marks; the document in Foedera is the

best authority, although its original is lost and it is obviously not altogether an

accurate copy, its date, “Morthampton, 7th August,” being of course a tran-

scriber's mistake for “Norham.”

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 103.

* The first child of John and Isabel of Angoulême—the future Henry III.-

was born October 1, 1207; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 219. The second,

Richard, was born January 6, 1209; Ann. Winton. ad ann. Both the Scot

king's daughters were born before the end of 1195, when one of them was

betrothed to Otto of Saxony, R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 299, 308.

* Chron. Mailros and Chron. Lanercost, a. 1209.

* See above, pp. 26, 32, 45.




The familiarity with Welsh politics which he had thus 1199-1209

acquired stood him in good stead when he became king.

At his accession, a struggle which had been going on for

two years between three rival claimants to the succession in

South Wales, Griffith and Maelgwyn, sons of the late prince

Rees ap Griffith, and Gwenwynwyn, son of Owen Cyveiliog,

prince of Powys, had just ended in the triumph of Griffith,

who, by the help of a force supplied to him by the English

government, overcame both his rivals at the close of 1198.

On Griffith's death in 12oo Gwenwynwyn for a moment

regained the ascendency in South Wales; but he found a

new and formidable rival in the prince of North Wales,

Llywelyn ap Jorwerth, who in a few years succeeded in

reducing most of the South Welsh princes to dependence

on himself." Throughout these years John, amid all his

political and military occupations on the continent, watched

every vicissitude of the struggle in Wales, kept up constant

relations with both parties, and balanced the one against

the other” with a mingled unscrupulousness and dexterity

for which even the Welshmen were scarcely a match, and

which at last brought them all alike to his feet. In July

I 202 Llywelyn promised to do homage to the English king

as soon as the latter should return from over sea; * before

October 15, 1204, he was betrothed to John's illegitimate

daughter Joan,” and in 1206 she became his wife." In

1208 his rival Gwenwynwyn was in an English prison,

whence he obtained his release by doing homage to John at

Shrewsbury on October 8.” Llywelyn's promised visit to

the English court seems to have not yet taken place; but a

year later, on the king's return from the north, there befell,

say the chroniclers, “what had never been heard of in times

past: all the Welsh nobles”—that is, evidently, the princes .

º

of both North and South Wales—“came to him and did

1 Ann. Cambriae and Brut y Tywysogion, a. I 197-1209.

* Rot. Chart. vol. i. pp. 23, 44, 63, Ioo b, IoS, Io:3 b, Io; ; Rot. Pat.

vol. i. pp. 39, 40, 44 b, 51 b, 88, 89 b, 91 ; Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 23 b, 24.

Brut, a. 1207, 1209.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 8 b.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 12.

* Ann. Wigorn. a. 1206.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. IoI.

4


him homage,” not on the border, but in the heart of his own

realm, at Woodstock," on October 18 or 19, 1209.”

The king's triumph was complete. The last date which

had been fixed for the publication of the papal sentence

was October 6; * the sentence was still unpublished, and

the bishops who should have published it had fled. They

proclaimed it indeed in France in November; * but John took

care that no official notification of the fact should reach

England, and the sentence remained a dead letter. Its

existence was known and talked of all over the country, but

it was talked of with bated breath. The excommunicate

king held his Christmas feast at Windsor surrounded by “all

the great men of England,” who sat at his table and held

intercourse with him as usual, simply because they dared

not do otherwise.” Of the fate in store for those who

stood aloof, one terrible example sufficed. The archdeacon

of Norwich quitted his place at the Exchequer table at

Westminster, after warning his fellow - officers that they

were perilling their souls by serving an excommunicate king.

He was seized by a band of soldiers, loaded with chains,

flung into prison, and there crushed to death beneath a cope

of lead." The whole body of the clergy, already stripped of

their possessions, were now in peril of their lives. As the

king was passing through one of the border counties he met

some of the sheriff's officers in charge of a prisoner with his

hands tied behind him. They said the man was a robber,

and had robbed and slain a priest on the highway: what,

they asked, should be done with him P. “Loose him and let

him go,” answered John, “he has slain one of my enemies l’”

Nor was his persecution limited to the clergy; the lay

relatives and friends of Langton and of the other exiled bishops

were hunted down and flung into prison, and their property

1209

§ R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 227; M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 119.

The event was not really so unprecedented as these writers imagined ; the princes

of both North and South Wales had done homage to Henry II. at Oxford in

1177. The chroniclers’ expressions about this Welsh homage to John, however,

show the impression which it made and the importance which was attached

to it. * Itin. a. II.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. appendix to preface, p, cvi.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 1209.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 231. * Ib. p. 229.


seized for the king." When he could plunder his Christian

subjects no more, he turned upon the Jews. At the opening

of 12 Io all the Jews in England, of both sexes, were by his

order arrested, imprisoned, and tortured to make them give

up their wealth. It was said that the king wrung ten

thousand marks from one Jew at Bristol by causing seven of

his teeth to be torn out, one every day for a week,” and that

the total sum transferred from the coffers of the Jews to

the royal treasury amounted to sixty-six thousand marks.”

Never before—not even in the worst days of William the

Red—had England fallen so low as she now lay at the feet

of John. “It was as if he alone were mighty upon earth,

and he neither feared God nor regarded man.” “ John seems

in fact to have been one of the very few men of whom this

latter assertion can be made with literal truth ; and in this

utter recklessness and ruthlessness lay the secret of his

terrible strength. “There was not a man in the land who

could resist his will in anything.”* The very few barons who

had dared openly to resist it since his return from Poitou in

I 206 were now all in Ireland ; and it was Ireland that he

set himself to subdue in 12 Io.

John de Courcy had apparently ceased to be governor

of the Irish March in I 191. The succession of governors

there during the next few years is obscure; but we know

that, as John's chief ministers, they bore the same title which

was borne by the chief minister of the king in England, that

of justiciar." Owing to the paucity and obscurity of the

records it is difficult to gain any real understanding of

the vicissitudes of the English dominion in Ireland during

the twenty-five years which elapsed between John's two

visits to that country, and especially during the fourteen

* R. Wendover, vol. ii. pp. 223, 224. * Ib. p. 232.

* Ann. Waverl. a. 1210.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. Ioo. 5 Ib.

* Ware, Antiq. p. 102, makes William Petit and William the Marshal

justiciars in 1191 ; but no authority is given. R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 99, says

that Roger de Planes was “in tota terra comitis [Johannis] justiciarius” when

he was slain in October 1191; see above, p. 29. Peter Pippard was justiciar in

Ireland in 1194, according to Henry of Marlborough as quoted in Butler's History

of Trim Castle, p. 3; and Hamo de Valognes held the office c. I 196-1 197; cf.

Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 342, and Ware, l.c.

I2 io

I 191


1191-12oo years between his first visit there and his accession to the

English crown. He granted a new and important charter

to the city of Dublin in 1192. In 1195 the intruders—

neither for the first nor for the last time—fell out among them-

selves: “John de Courcy and the son of Hugh de Lacy

marched with an army to conquer the English of Leinster

and Munster.”* They certainly did not succeed in wresting

Leinster from William the Marshal. As for Munster,

Richard de Cogan was apparently still holding his ground in

Desmond; Raymond the Fat probably died in 1184 or

1 185,” and as he had no direct heirs,” the share of that

kingdom which had been originally allotted to Fitz-Stephen

lapsed to John as overlord.” From the city of Cork the

“English" are said to have been driven out in I 196;" but

their expulsion was only momentary. Meanwhile they had

at last begun to gain a footing in Thomond. By 1 196 they

had got possession of the city of Limerick; in that year or

the next they lost it, but it was speedily recovered by

Meiler Fitz-Henry," who in 1199 or early in 12oo became

chief justiciar in Ireland.” Limerick was put under the

charge of William de Burgh, who apparently had won for

himself some lands within the kingdom of Thomond, among

them Ardpatrick, of which he received a grant from John in

September 1199.”

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 55; Gilbert, Hist. Documents of Ireland, pp. 51-

55. Other Irish Charters of John before his accession to the crown—all date-

less—are in Rot. Canc. Hibern. Cal. vol. i. pt. i. pp. 2, 4, 5, and Hist. MSS.

Comm. 4th Report, pp. 574, 581.

* Four Masters, a. 1195.

* He certainly was not killed in 1182 as the Four Masters say; but he dis-

appears after 1183. See Dic. Mat. Biogr. “Fitz-Gerald (Raymond).”

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 345, 409.

* In 1207 John confirmed to William de Barri a sub-enfeoffment made by

Fitz-Stephen to Philip de Barri, William's father and Fitz-Stephen's nephew.

Rot. Chart. p. 172.

* Four Masters, a. 1196, note.

7 Cf. Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 342, and Four Masters, a. 1196.

* Rot. Chart. p. 98.

° Ib. p. 19 b. John made at the same time several other grants of land

within the honour, or kingdom, of Limerick, ib. All these grants, however,

except the grant to William de Burgh, seem to have been cancelled by the later

one to William de Braose; see below, p. 139. Half a cantred of land at “Tilra’ct

in Kelsela" had been granted by John to De Burgh before King Henry's

death, Hist. MSS. Comm., 3rd Report, p. 231.

|


The last Irish Ard-Righ, Roderic O'Conor, died in 1198-1202

1 198;’ he had been dethroned sixteen years before, but

his death was the signal for renewed strife between his sons .

for the possession of his kingdom of Connaught. The

foreign settlers in Ireland took sides for their own interest

in the struggle between the native princes; John de Courcy

and the “English of Ulidia,” with the De Lacys of Meath

and their followers, supported Cathal Crovderg O'Conor,

while his rival, Cathal Carrach, was helped by “William

Burke, with the English of Limerick.” For a moment

Cathal Carrach's party was victorious ; but next year (1200)

he was attacked by “Meiler and the English of Leinster,”

while De Burgh changed sides and joined Cathal Crovderg.

In 1201 or 1202 the united forces of Cathal Crovderg and

De Burgh won a battle in which Cathal Carrach was slain.

Cathal Crovderg being thus master of Connaught, De Burgh

at once began to plot against his life; but the men of Con-

naught slaughtered the followers of the double-dyed traitor,

and he himself escaped as best he could back to Limerick.”

The “honour of Limerick”—exclusive of the city and

the Ostmen's cantred, which the king retained in his own

hands, and the service due from the lands held within that

honour by William de Burgh, which was also reserved to

the Crown — had meanwhile been granted by John, on

January 12, 1201, to William de Braose, “as King Henry gave

it to his uncle, Philip de Braose.”* These last words define

the extent of the “honour,” as corresponding (with the excep-

tions specified) to the “kingdom of Limerick” (Thomond)

named in Henry's grant of 1177. Philip de Braose was

probably now dead. William was the son of Philip's elder

brother, another William who to the family estates of

Bramber in Sussex and Barnstaple and Totnes in Devon

had added, by his marriage with an heiress, the lordships of

Radnor, Brecon, and Abergavenny in Wales.” The younger

1 Four Masters, a. 1198.

* Four Masters and Ann. Loch Cé, a. 1199-1202.

* Rot. Chart. p. 84b.

* Dugdale, Baronage, pt. i. p. 414; who, however, has confused father and

son. See Genealogist, vol. iv. pp. 133-141, and Dic. Mat. Biog. “Braose,

William de.”


William probably succeeded to all these possessions soon

after I 179. Before 1 189 his sister Maud was married to

Griffith Ap Rees, who from 1198 to 1201 was Prince of

South Wales; and throughout the last ten years of the

twelfth century William was constantly concerned in the

quarrels of the South Welsh princes and people.” His

daughter Margaret had before November 19, 12oo become

the wife of Walter de Lacy,” the lord of Meath, who was

already her father's neighbour on the Welsh border, where

Ludlow formed part of the Lacy heritage; a younger

daughter was married before 12 Io to a son of another

baron of the Welsh March, Roger Mortimer.” Count John

of Mortain, as earl of Gloucester and lord of Glamorgan,

was also for ten years a neighbour of William de Braose, and

evidently made a friend of him, for in 1199 William was at

the head of the party which most vigorously urged John's

claim to the crown." In June 12oo he received a royal

grant of “all the lands which he had acquired or might at

any future time acquire from our Welsh enemies, to the

increase of his barony of Radnor.”" As the king was at

the same time in diplomatic relations with several of the

“enemies” whom William was thus authorized to despoil,

this grant was of doubtful value. The same may be said of

the grant of Thomond; this, however, was a speculation on

both sides; William covenanted to pay the king five

thousand marks for it at the rate of five hundred marks a

year."

De Braose immediately went to Ireland;8 and in process

of time he succeeded in obtaining possession of the greater

part of his new fief, though the difficulties with which he

had to contend were many and great. The other persons

who had previously received from John grants of land in

1179-12oi

* His father was living in that year; Monasticon, vol. vi. pt. i. p. 457.

* Ann. Camb. a. 1189, 1192, 1195, I 196; Brut y Tywysogion, a. 1196,

1197. Maud died in 1209, Brut, ad ann.

* Rot. Chart. p. 80. Walter was the eldest son of Hugh de Lacy who was

killed in II.86.

* Aoedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 107.

* Ann. Margan. a. 1199. * Rot. Chart. p. 66b.

* Rot. Oblat. p. 99, “ad quodlibet scaccarium quingentas marcas argenti.”

* Rot. Chart. p. 100 b.


Thomond* no doubt resented and resisted the change in

their position from tenants-in-chief of the king to under-

tenants of William de Braose. It seems that they were

upheld in their resistance by the justiciar, Meiler Fitz-Henry,

and that John in consequence summoned Meiler to his

court, suspended him from his office, and put it into com-

mission in December 1201. In August 1202 John issued

further orders for enforcing the claims of De Braose in

Thomond; in September he forgave him all the debts

which he owed to King Henry and King Richard ; in

October he granted the entire custody of the lands and

castles of Glamorgan, Gwenllwg and Gower to “William de

Braose, whose service we greatly approve.”* In the winter

William was with the king in Normandy, and had the

custody of the captive Arthur. This he resigned, seemingly

at the end of the year,” and in January 1203 he was in

charge of some matters connected with the fleet.”

Meanwhile the governor of Limerick city, William de

Burgh, had escaped from the vengeance of the Irish allies

whom he had betrayed, only to fall under that of the

English justiciar whom he had set at defiance. Meiler

Fitz-Henry had been restored to his post; in 1203 he and

Walter de Lacy joined with the Irish of Connaught in

expelling De Burgh from Limerick,” and on July 8

William de Braose was appointed by the king to succeed

De Burgh as constable of the city.” Meiler and De Burgh

had already appealed against each other to the king;7 in

March 1204 a commission was appointed to hear their

reciprocal complaints; * in September all De Burgh's Irish

estates except those in Connaught were restored to him on

* Carte's Life of Ormonde, ed. 1851, vol. i. pp. xliv, xlv.; Rot. Chart. pp.

19% * * * * pp. 4, 7, 16 b, 18 b, 19 b.

* W. Armor. Philipp. 1. vi. vv. 478-492. The poet asserts that William

resigned his charge because he suspected John's intentions towards his prisoner.

This would be shortly before the attempt to blind Arthur, who was then in the

custody of Hubert de Burgh.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 24 b. * Ann. Loch Cé, a. 1203.

* Rot. Chart. p. 107 b. 7 Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 31 b.

* Ib. p. 39 b. On 29th April the commissioners are informed that De Burgh

is respited, and Meiler is bidden to give him seisin of his lands again; ib. p.

41 b.

I2OI-I2O4


1204-1206 his promise of “standing to right in the King's Court of

Ireland.”" There is no record of the trial, which may have

been prevented by his death, for at the end of the year or

in 1205 he died;” and on April 3, 1206 the justiciar was

ordered to take all his Munster estates into the king's hand.”

The reservation of De Burgh's Connaught lands in 1204

may have been made in consequence of some negotiations

which were at that moment going on between Meiler, as

John's representative, and the King of Connaught, Cathal

Crowderg. Cathal, it seems, offered to cede two-thirds of

Connaught to John, on condition that the remaining third

should be secured to himself and his heirs for a yearly

payment of one hundred marks. John was willing to

accept this offer, but he insisted that the portion of land

to be ceded to him should be chosen by Meiler, and bade

Meiler take care that it was “the best part, and that which

contained the best towns, ports, and sites for castles.” +

Possibly this claim of John's to choose the land for himself

was refused by Cathal; the negotiations certainly came to

nothing, for in December 1206 Cathal made another pro-

position. He would hold one-third of Connaught of King

John for a hundred marks a year; out of the other two-

thirds he would cede to John two cantreds, and for the

remainder he would pay him a tribute of three hundred

marks. John authorized Meiler to accept these terms, if he

could get no better.” Whether the agreement was ever

actually made, there is nothing to show; it was not likely

to have any practical result. The invaders had evidently

already gained some slight and precarious footing in eastern

Connaught; but they had too much to do within their own

March—as the dominions of the English crown in Ireland

were called in those days"—to make any real progress

westward for some years to come.

* Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 46.

* Ann. Loch Cé a. 1205; Four Masters, a. 1204.

* Rot. Pat. p. 6ob. They seem to have been restored to his son Richard

before July 11, 1214; ib. pp. 118 b, I19.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 91. Cf. Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 6 b.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 62.

* Rot. Chart. p. 68 b (a. 12oo); Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 4o (a. 1205). I am

indebted to Mr. G. H. Orpen for the information that the districts held by the


The turbulence and lawlessness which prevailed in the 1199-1205

Irish March reflected that of the Welsh March whence most

of its original settlers had come. William de Braose and

William de Burgh were far from being the only barons at

feud with Meiler Fitz-Henry, either simply as a fellow-baron,

or in his official capacity of representative of the king. In

September I 199 John de Courcy and Walter de Lacy are

mentioned in a royal writ as having acted together “for the

destruction of our realm of Ireland.”" The reference

probably is to their joint attack upon Leinster in I I 95,

which had been followed by the forfeiture of Lacy's English

and Welsh lands; these, however, he had regained in 1198.”

In 1203, as has been seen, he helped Meiler to expel

William de Burgh from Limerick; and in February 1204

he was appointed one of four commissioners to assist Meiler

in dealing with escheats.” His former ally, John de Courcy,

had a safe-conduct to and from the king's court in July

1202;* but he evidently did not come to terms with the

king ; and next year the Lacy's turned against him ; Hugh

de Lacy, Walter's younger brother, defeated him in a battle

near Down and drove him out of Ulidia." In September he

had another safe-conduct to go to the king and return “if

he does not make peace with us.”" This time it seems that

he did “make peace,” but failed to fulfil its conditions. On

August 31, 1204, he was summoned, on pain of forfeiture,

to come to the king's service “as he swore to come”; and

Meiler was instructed, if the forfeiture should take place, to

give to the two De Lacys the eight cantreds of De Courcy's

land which lay nearest to Meath.” De Courcy incurred the

forfeiture; Meiler seemingly committed its execution to the

De Lacys; they again attacked De Courcy, and drove him

to take refuge in Tyrone;” and on May 2, 1205, King

English crown in Ireland were not known as “the Pale” till after Poynings's

Act (1494), when the colonists were ordered to maintain a ditch “six feet high

on the side which neared next to the Irishmen” (Joyce, Hist. of Ireland, p. 351).

* Rot. Oblat. p. 74.

* Eyton, Hist. of Shropshire, vol. v. pp. 257, 258.

* Rot. Chart. p. 133 b.

* Rot. Pat. p. 15. * Four Masters, a. 1203.

: Rot. Pat, p. 34 b, * Ib, pp. 45, 45 b.

Four Masters, a. 1204.

24


John granted Ulster to Hugh de Lacy, to hold “as John de

Courcy held it on the day when Hugh defeated him.””

A few weeks later Hugh was belted earl of Ulster;” and at

the end of June the triumph of the Lacys was completed by

a royal order forbidding the chief justiciar to “move war

against any man of the March” without the consent of Earl

Hugh and his brother Walter.”

With the colleagues thus forced upon him Meiler was

soon at strife. His strife with Walter de Lacy, indeed, had

recommenced already. Walter's appointment as a com-

missioner of escheats in I2O4 had been made in connexion

with a demand which John—anxious to prepare for an

attack upon France, as well as to guard against an expected

French invasion of England, and scarcely daring to ask his

English subjects for more money — addressed to all his

vassals in Ireland, that they would furnish him with an aid.*

They undertook to do so; on September 1 the king

thanked them for their services and their promises, and

desired that the latter might be fulfilled." At the same time

he was taking measures for the security of the March and of

his own authority there; on August 31 he had ordered

Meiler to build a castle at Dublin,” and in September he

bade the citizens do every man his part in helping to fortify

the city." In November he decided upon taking back into

his own hands the city of Limerick and its cantred, being,

as he said, advised by his barons of England that this step

was necessary for the security of his domains in Connaught

and Cork. It appears that William de Braose had called in

the help of his son-in-law, the lord of Meath, for the keeping

of this important border - post; the king's orders for its

surrender to the justiciar were addressed to Walter de Lacy

and the bailiffs of William de Braose.” Walter seemingly

refused to obey the order; Meiler, however, succeeded in

1205

I2O4

1 Rot. Pat. p. 54.

* Rot. Chart. p. 151—“de qua [i.e. Ultonia] ipsum cinximus in comitem.”

Date, May 29, 1205.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 40. * Rot. Chart. pp. 133 b, 134.

* Rot. Pat. p. 45 b.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 6 b.

7 Rot. Pat. p. 45 b. John had granted another charter to Dublin on

November 7, 1200; Rot. Chart. pp. 78 b, 79. * Rot. Pat. p. 47.




taking possession of the city, “on account of which there

arose a great war” between him and De Lacy, with the result

that John, to end their strife, took away the custody of

Limerick from both of them, and restored it in August

12o 5 to William de Braose.” Nineteen months later

Walter de Lacy's castle of Ludlow was seized for the Crown,

and Walter was bidden to come and “stand to right” in the

English court.”

By that time Meiler was at strife with William de

Braose again, and also with another Marcher lord of very

different character from any of those with whom he had as

yet had to deal. Meiler Fitz-Henry, though loyal to the

king, was evidently not quite the man for the post of chief

justiciar in Ireland. He was one of the few survivors of the

first band of Norman-Welsh adventurers who had taken part

in the invasion under Robert Fitz-Stephen. The royal blood

of England and of Wales was mingled in his veins; he was

in fact, though not in law, first cousin to Henry II* The

two young Lacys, now so often opposed to him, were cousins

of his wife, a niece of the elder Hugh de Lacy." He was,

however, not one of the great barons of the March ; he

seems to have held in chief of the Crown nothing except

three cantreds in Desmond granted to him by John in

October 12oo;" his principal possession was the barony of

Leix in Ossory," for which he owed homage to William the

Marshal as lord of Leinster. 