170.

* /tin. a. 16.

* He was at Worcester December 25-27; Tewkesbury, 27, 28; Geddington,

December 31, 1214; and at the New Temple in London January 7-15, 1215.

Itin. a. I6.

I2 I4

I2 I5

1.


1215

Winchester, he had promised those ancient laws and liberties,

and thus he was bound by his own oath to the observance of

the same.” John cautiously answered that “the matter which

they sought was great and difficult, wherefore he asked for

a delay till the close of Easter, that he might consider how

to satisfy both their demands and the dignity of his crown.” "

He then seems to have tried to persuade them—no doubt

each man singly—into giving him a written promise “never

again to demand such liberties from him or his successors”;

but to this no one would consent except the bishop of

Winchester, the earl of Chester, and William Brewer.” At

last the proposed adjournment till the close of Easter was

agreed upon, but not till the king had, “against his will,”

pledged himself by three sureties to fulfill his promise by

giving reasonable satisfaction to all parties at the date thus

appointed.”

The king's sureties were the archbishop of Canterbury,

the bishop of Ely, and William the Marshal. The choice

of the archbishop as one of them was good policy on John's

part; and Langton's acceptance of the office implies no

wavering or double-dealing on his side. In so far as it was

his inspiration that gave a new force to the enterprise of the

barons, by raising it from a struggle for their own privileges

into a struggle for the liberties of the English nation, he

was in truth, as Roger of Wendover says, their “chief ally”; “

and for the achievement of its end as he himself conceived

it, he did indeed “give them his most faithful help to the

utmost of his power.” But the help which he gave them

was not that of a partisan ; Stephen Langton was at once

too true a churchman and too great a statesman, and held

too lofty a conception of his proper constitutional functions

as primate of all England, to identify himself with any party.

The right and the duty of the archbishop of Canterbury

was to be the partisan of neither king nor people, but the

guide and monitor of both, so far as they would accept his

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 296. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 218.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 12o.

* R. Wendover, l.c.

* “Isti omnes conjurati Stephanum Cantuariensem archiepiscopum capitalem

consentaneum habuerunt,” ib. p. 298.


guidance and listen to his admonitions, and the mediator

between them whenever mediation was needed. He was by

virtue of his office the first adviser of the Crown as well as

the guardian of the nation's rights ; and it was only by

standing firmly at his post by the king's side in the former

capacity that he could be truly efficient in the latter.

Langton's attitude was evidently understood by both parties

at the time. From the moment when the northern barons

first asked the king to confirm his great-grandfather's charter,

if not before, John must have known that the hand of the

primate was with them in the matter. But he was quite as

much alive as they were to the value of such a helper;

moreover, he seems to have had the somewhat rare gift of

being able to recognize in another man qualities which were

conspicuously absent from his own character. Much as he

hated Langton, he evidently trusted to his honour and

loyalty as implicitly as he trusted to that of William the

Marshal. He therefore continued to the end the policy

which he had pursued ever since the archbishop's coming to

England. He treated Langton with every mark of confidence

and respect; he carefully avoided any step which might

have forced him into opposition on ecclesiastical grounds;

and in his diplomatic dealings with the barons it was

Langton whom he employed as his chief commissioner and

representative.

The king, however, was even more prompt than the

barons in preparing to back diplomacy by force. Imme-

diately after the Epiphany meeting he ordered a renewal of

the oath of allegiance throughout the country; and this time

it was to be taken in the form of an oath of liege homage,

binding his subjects to “stand by him against all men.”

This, it is said, was an unwonted addition, which was gener-

ally opposed as being “contrary to the charter”—the

standard by which all things were now tried." It may

have been in connexion with this matter that the king sent

I2 I5

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 218. It need scarcely be remarked that the

charter contains not a word on the subject. The argument evidently was “what-

ever is not in the charter is contrary to it”; in other words, “omission is pro-

hibition.” The fact that such an argument might be used on both sides was of

course conveniently ignored.

Feb. 10


to the men of sixteen southern and midland shires commis-

sioners “to explain his business” to them; but he ended

by withdrawing his demand, “not deeming the time oppor-

tune for exciting a tumult among the people.”” That

tumults would nevertheless arise before long he knew full

well; and to meet this danger he had already called to his

aid the loyal “barons and bachelors” of Poitou.” The

summons must have been issued immediately after, if not

even in anticipation of, his meeting with the English mal-

contents at Epiphany, and the response must have been as

prompt as the summons, for on February 8 he had already

heard of the arrival in Ireland of some troops sent to him by

Savaric de Mauléon, and was issuing orders to the arch-

bishop of Dublin for the payment of their passage to England.”

On February 19 the king gave a safe-conduct to “the

barons of the North” that they might come to Oxford to

speak with the primate, the other bishops and the Earl

Marshal on Sunday the 22nd.” Whether this conference

took place, or what came of it, we are not told ; but on March

13 John wrote to the barons and bachelors of Poitou that the

matter for which he had summoned them was now settled,

and he therefore, thanking them for their readiness to obey

his call, bade those of them who had not yet set out remain

at home, and those who had started go home again, with the

assurance that he would indemnify them for their expenses."

It is possible that the barons may have asked for the

conference at Oxford in order to remonstrate against the

warlike preparations of the king, and that it may have

resulted in some temporary arrangement which compelled

him to dismiss the Poitevins. It is also possible that this

dismissal may have been prompted by tidings from Rome.

The prospect of some such crisis as the present one had

almost certainly been in the minds of king and barons alike

when John performed his homage to the Pope; and both

alike now sought to make their profit out of that transaction,

each side appealing to the Pope, as the common overlord of

1215

1 Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 128. * W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 218.

* Rot. Pat. p. 130. * Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 187 b.

* Rot. Pat. p. 129. ° Ib. p. 130.




both, to use his authority in compelling the other to yield.

An envoy from John, William Mauclerc, had reached Rome

on February 17. Eleven days later Eustace de Vesci and

two other representatives of the malcontent party arrived

with letters for the Pope. In these letters—so Mauclerc

reported to his master—the confederate barons besought

Innocent, “since he was lord of England,” to urge and, if

needful, compel the king to restore the ancient liberties

granted by his predecessors and confirmed by his own oath.

They recited how at the meeting in London at Epiphany

John had not only refused to grant these liberties, but had

endeavoured to make the petitioners promise never to ask

for them again. They begged that the Pope would take

measures to help them in this matter, “forasmuch as he well

knew that they had at his command boldly opposed the king

in behalf of the Church's liberty, and that the king's grant

of an annual revenue and other honours to the Pope and the

Roman Church had been made not of free will and devotion,

but from fear and under compulsion from them.” Of what

John wrote, or charged his envoy to say, to Innocent in his

behalf, no record remains; but Innocent's letters show what

the tenour of John's argument must have been. With his

usual dexterity the king made capital out of the secret

meetings held, or said to have been held, by the malcontents;

and he also brought into special prominence the one point of

discussion which was quite clearly defined, and in which he

unmistakeably had precedent on his side—the question of the

scutage. On March 19 Innocent wrote to the archbishop

of Canterbury and the other English bishops, expressing his

surprise that they had not checked the quarrel between the

king and “certain magnates and barons,” and reproving them

for their failure to do so; he strongly condemned the “con-

spiracies and conjurations” which the barons were reported

to have made, and ordered the bishops to quash all such con-

spiracies and urge the barons to proceed only by fair and

lawful means. On the other hand, he besought the king “to

treat the aforesaid nobles graciously, and mercifully to grant

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 120. See above, p. 182.

Q

1215


their just petitions.” On the same day he wrote to the

barons, informing them of the contents of his letter to the

bishops." On April 1 he wrote to the barons again,

avowedly in consequence of the king's complaint of their

refusal to pay the scutage for the Poitevin war; he reproved

them for their contumacy in this matter, and “warned and

exhorted ” them to satisfy the king's claims without further

delay.”

By the middle of April the two former of these letters

must have reached England, the second being probably

brought back by Eustace de Vesci and his companions.

The third letter was scarcely needed to show the barons that

their cause was lost at Rome. John, moreover, had secured

its ruin in that quarter by taking the Cross *—partly, no

doubt, as a protection against personal violence, but still

more as a means of enlisting the Pope's strongest sympathies

in his behalf, and holding up his enemies to execration as

hinderers of the crusade. They grew desperate; they held

another council among themselves, at which they determined,

without waiting for their promised interview with the king,

that they “would deal civilly with him no longer”; “ and

in Easter week they assembled at Stamford in arms.

Five earls and forty barons are mentioned by name as

present at the muster, “with many others”; they all came

with horses and arms, and brought with them “a countless

host,” estimated to comprise about two thousand knights,

besides other horsemen, sergeants-at-arms, and foot soldiers.”

“And because for the most part they came from the north,

they were all called Northerners.” From Stamford they

marched to Northampton, but without doing any act of

1215

April

19-26

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 127. * Ib. p. 128.

* On February 2, according to R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 296; on Ash

Wednesday (March 4), according to W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 219, and Ann.

Winton. a. 1215. This latter is the likelier date; if the fact had been known at

Rome before the Pope's letters were written, they would almost certainly have

contained some reference to it.

* W. Coventry, l.c.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 297, 298; M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p.

585. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 219, adds a bishop, Giles of Hereford. Giles,

however, was there not as bishop, but as the avenger of his father, mother and

brother—William, Maud, and the younger William de Braose.


violence." John, who had spent Easter in London,” sent the

primate and some other bishops and magnates to parley with

them.” Several meetings appear to have taken place. The

deliberations evidently turned chiefly on the Pope's letters.

No allusion is made by the chroniclers to the letter about the

scutage, which perhaps had not yet arrived ; but, on the one

hand, Innocent's condemnation of secret conspiracies could

not be ignored ; and on the other, the barons urged his

injunction to the king to hearken to their “just petitions.” +

At length John—secure in the consciousness that he could

refuse every petition on the plea that it was not just—author-

ized his commissioners to demand of the barons, in his name,

a categorical statement of the laws and liberties which they

desired.

This message was delivered to the insurgents by the

primate and the Marshal, at Brackley, on Monday April 27

—the day after that originally fixed for the meeting of the

barons and the king. “Then they [the barons] presented to

the envoys a certain schedule, which consisted for the most part

of ancient laws and customs of the realm, declaring that if

the king did not at once grant these things and confirm them

with his seal, they would compel him by force.”" This

“schedule” was no doubt a kind of first draft, prepared under

the direction of Langton himself in his conferences with the

insurgents during the previous week, of those “Articles of the

Barons” from which we chiefly learn the grievances of the

time, and most of which were ultimately embodied in the

Great Charter. Langton and the Marshal carried it back to

the king, who was now in Wiltshire." One by one the

articles were read out to him by the primate. John listened

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 219. * Itin. a. 16.

* W. Coventry, l.c. 4 Ib.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 298.

* Roger of Wendover, Walter of Coventry, and several other annalists

absurdly say that in Easter week (April 19-26) John was at, or near, Oxford,

where he was to have met the barons. John had not been at Oxford since the

Tuesday before Easter, April 13; from the 16th to the 23rd he was in London;

on the 23rd he went to Kingston, Reading and Alton, and thence on the 26th

to Clarendon; ſtin. a. 16. On the day he left London he granted a general

safe-conduct to all persons who should come to him in the suite of or with letters

patent from the archbishop (Aot. Pat. p. 134); none of the barons, however, seem

to have availed themselves of this offer.

I215

ſº


with a scornful smile : “Why do these barons not ask for

my kingdom at once P” he said. “Their demands are idle

dreams, without a shadow of reason.” Then he burst into a

fury, and swore that he would never grant to them liberties

which would make himself a slave. In vain the archbishop

and the Marshal endeavoured to persuade him to yield; he

only bade them go back to the barons and repeat every word

that he had said. They performed their errand ; * and the

barons immediately sent to the king a formal renunciation

of their homage and fealty,” and chose for themselves a

captain-general in the person of Robert Fitz-Walter, to whom

they gave the title of “Marshal of the army of God and

Holy Church.”* They then marched back to Northampton,

occupied the town and laid siege to the castle.*

The king was not behindhand in his preparations for

war. His friends were already mustering at Gloucester; on

April 30 he requested them to proceed thence on the

following Monday (May 3), well furnished with horses and

arms, and with “all the men they could get,” to Cirencester,

there to await his further commands.” Orders were issued

for strengthening the fortifications of London, Oxford,

Norwich, Bristol and Salisbury." The earls of Salisbury,

Warren, Pembroke and others perambulated the country to

see that the royal castles were properly fortified and

manned ;’ help was summoned from Flanders * and from

Poitou." Early in May the king returned for a couple of

days to London ;” and as fourteen years before he had won

the support of its citizens in his struggle with Richard's

chancellor by granting to them the “commune" which they

desired, so now he endeavoured to secure their adhesion by

confirming their liberties and adding to them the crowning

privilege of a fully constituted municipality, the right to

1215

*A

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 299.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 219. * R. Wendover, l.c.

* Cf. R. Wendover, l.c., and R. Coggeshall, p. 171.

* Rot. Pat. p. 134 b.

0 Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 198, 198 b ; Rot. Pat. p. 135.

7 Rot. Pat. p. 135, 135 b.

On May 8 John announces that some horse and foot are coming over under

Gerard of Gravelines; Rot. Pat. p. 141.

° Ib. p. 135 (May 11). 19 May 7-9; Itin. a. 16.

8


elect their own mayor every year." Meanwhile the

“northern " barons had found Northampton castle too

strong to be taken without military engines which they did

not possess; so at the end of a fortnight they had raised the

siege and moved on to Bedford. Here the castle was given

up to them by its commandant, William de Beauchamp.”

Their forces were rapidly increasing in number; the younger

men especially, sons and nephews of the greater barons,

joined them readily, “wishing to make for themselves a

name in war”; the elder magnates, for the most part, clave

to the king “as their lord.” "

On May 9 the king—now at Windsor—proposed that

the quarrel should be decided by eight arbitrators, four to

be chosen by himself and four by “the barons who are

against us,” with the Pope as “superior” over them ; he

offered the earl of Warren and four bishops as sureties for

his own acceptance of the award, and promised that until it

was delivered he would take no forcible measures against

the insurgents, “save according to the law of the realm and

the judgement of their peers in his court.” “ This proposal

seems to have been rejected at once, for two days later

John ordered the sheriffs to seize the lands, goods and

chattels of “his enemies” in their several shires and apply

them to his benefit." Almost immediately afterwards he

seems to have commissioned the archbishop of Canterbury

to negotiate a truce for a few days. On the 16th he

appointed his brother, Earl William of Salisbury, to act as

his representative in London.” The object of William's

mission evidently was to secure, if possible, the loyalty of

the “mayor, aldermen and other barons of London,” which

John suspected to be wavering. His suspicion was correct;

a plot for the betrayal of the city was already ripe, and on

the very next morning—Sunday, May 17—the insurgents

were masters of the capital." The first use they made of

1 Rot. Chart. p. 207. * R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 299.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 220. * Rot. Pat. p. 141.

* Rot. Chart. p. 209; Aot. Claus. vol. i. p. 204.

* Rot. Pat. p. 136 b.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 299, 300; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 220 ; R.

Coggeshall, p. 171 ; for date see Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 137 b.

I215




1215

this success was to fill their pockets with plunder taken

from the king's partisans in the city, and from the Jews;

the next was to pull down the Jews' houses and use the

stones for repairing the city walls. They then sent letters

to all the earls, barons and knights who still adhered to the

king, “bidding them, if they cared to retain their property

and goods, forsake a king who was perjured and in rebellion

against his barons, and join with them in standing firmly

and fighting strongly for the peace and liberty of the realm ;

threatening that if they neglected so to do, they, the writers,

would direct their banners and their arms against them as

against public enemies, and do their utmost to overthrow

their castles, burn their dwellings, and destroy their fish-

ponds, orchards and parks.” These invitations and threats

brought over to the winning side all who had been waiting

to see which way the tide would turn, and they, of course,

made a right goodly company."

Still the king did not lose heart. He had gone from

Berkshire into Wiltshire,” and was at his hunting seat of

Fremantle—“a house which stands on a height, and in the

heart of a forest”—when, on May 18 or 19, a party of

Flemish knights under Robert de Béthune found their way

to him and offered themselves for his service. 