” Whether this

letter was genuine or forged, there is nothing to show; if

such a proposition was really made by Henry, it was prob-

ably only as a temporary expedient for putting off Philip's

importunity on the awkward question of Adela's marriage.

In the autumn Henry and Richard were again reconciled,”

and a little later both were for a moment reconciled to Philip

by a common vow of crusade.

On January 30, 1188, Henry returned to England,

and it seems that John went with him ; for when Philip

attacked Berry again in the summer, Henry “sent into

Normandy his son John, who crossed from Shoreham to

Dieppe.”" The king rejoined his son in July, and they prob-

ably remained together during the greater part of the next

eleven months, though there is no mention of John's presence

at any of the numerous conferences between Henry and

Philip. At one of these conferences—that at La Ferté

Bernard, on Trinity Sunday, June 4, 1189 °— Philip and

Richard demanded that John should be made to accom-

pany his father and brother on the crusade; Richard

even declared that he would not go himself unless John

* Rigord, c. 52 (ed. Delaborde, p. 180).

* Ib. Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 369.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. viii. pp. 232, 233.

* Gesta Hen. vol. ii. p. 9. * Ib. p. 40.

* R. Howden, vol. ii. p. 362.

1187

I 188

1189


1189

went too." Henry, on the other hand, now openly proposed

to Philip that Adela should marry John instead of Richard ;

but Philip, now that Richard was at his side, would not listen

to this suggestion.”

Our last glimpse of John during his father's lifetime is

at Le Mans on June 12, when Philip and Richard cap-

tured the city, and Henry was compelled to flee. A

contemporary tells us that before setting out on his flight

“the king caused his son John, whom he loved and in whom

he greatly trusted, to be disarmed.”* This precaution may

have been due to anxiety—groundless, as the issue proved

—lest John should thrust himself into danger in his father's

behalf; that it was not suggested by any doubts of John's

loyalty is plain, not only from the words of the writer who

records it, but also from Henry's action on the next morn-

ing, when, before setting out on his solitary ride from La

Frénaye back into Anjou, he despatched his remaining

followers to Normandy, after making the seneschal of the

duchy and Earl William de Mandeville swear that in case

of his own death the Norman castles should be given up to

John.” John, however, had then already left him—under

what circumstances, or at what precise moment, we know

not; but it seems clear that at some time between the

French attack upon Le Mans on the Monday morning and

Henry's arrival at La Frénaye on the same night, John had

either been sent away by his father for safety, or had found

some pretext for quitting his company, and that, in either

case, he used the opportunity to go his own way with such

characteristic ingenuity that for three whole weeks his father

never guessed whither that way really tended.”

* Gesta Hen. vol. ii. p. 66.

* R. Howden, vol. ii. p. 363.

* Hist, de G. le Mar. vv. 8542-4.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. p. 369.

5 Gerald indeed (l.c.) says: “In crastino vero . . . versus Audegaviam

rege properante, fidei tamen sacramentique vinculis senescallo Normanniae Guil-

lelmo Radulphi filio et comite Guillelmo de Mandeville ante constrictis, de

munitionibus Normanniae cunctis, siquid de ipso sinistrum fore contigerit, filiosuo

juniori Johanni reddendis, quanquam tamen et ipse ab eodem, proh dolor paulo

post discesserit.” But it looks very much as if “post” here were a mistake for

“ante,” for the whole story indicates that John was not at La Frénaye on the

night of June 12. Cf. W. Newb. 1. iii. c. 25 : “Tunc” (after the flight from


Henry and Richard had been set at strife by an illusion

of their own imaginations. Richard had been spurred to

rebellion by the idea that his father aimed at disinheriting

him in favour of John, and might succeed in that aim,

unless prevented by force. Henry's schemes for John were

probably in reality much less definite and less outrageous

than Richard imagined ; but there can be little doubt that

the otherwise unaccountable inconsistencies and self-contra-

dictions, the seemingly wanton changes of front, by which

the king in his latter years had so bewildered and exas-

perated his elder son, were the outcome of an insatiable

desire to place John, somehow or other, in a more lofty and

independent position than a younger son was fairly entitled

to expect. The strange thing is that Henry never per-

ceived how hopeless were his efforts, nor Richard how

groundless were his fears; neither of them, apparently,

realizing that the substitution of John for Richard as heir

of the Angevin house was an idea which could not possibly

be carried into effect. The utter selfishness of John, however,

rendered him, mere lad of one-and-twenty as he was, proof

against illusions where his own interest was concerned ; and

it was he who pricked the bubble. On July 4 Henry,

sick unto death, made his submission to Philip and Richard,

and received a list of the traitors who had transferred their

homage to the latter. That night, at Chinon, he bade his

vice-chancellor read him the names. The vice-chancellor

hesitated ; the king insisted; at last the truth which was to

give him his death-blow came out: “Sire, the first that is

written down here is Lord John, your son.”"

Le Mans) “Johannes filiorum ejus minimus, quem tenerrime diligebat, recessit

ab eo’’; and Gesta Hen. vol. ii. p. 72 : “Johannes filius ejus, qui mortis suae

occasio, immo causa praecipua fuerat, eo quod illum tempore guerrae, cum capta

esset civitas Cenomannis, reliquerat.” These two writers, indeed, taken by

themselves, would seem to imply that John's desertion was open; but Henry's

charge to the two Norman barons, and his subsequent horror at the final dis-

covery of John's treason, indicate that it was managed with a refinement of

duplicity which is really more in accord with John's character.

1 Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 9oz7-8.

1189


CHAPTER II

1189-1199

Then ther com most wykke tydyng

To Quer de Lyoun Richard our kyng,

How off Yngelonde hys brother Ihon,

That was accursyd off flesch and bon,

... wolde with maystry off hand

Be crownyd kyng in Yngeland.

Richard Coer de Lion, ll. 6267-70, 6273-4.

ON July 6 Henry died; on the 8th he was buried at

Fontevraud. Richard attended the burial; John did not,

but immediately afterwards, either at Fontevraud or on the

way northward, he sought the presence of his brother.

Richard received him graciously, and on reaching Normandy

“granted him all the lands which his father had given him,

to wit, four thousand pounds' worth of lands in Eng-

land, and the county of Mortain with its appurtenances.”

These words, and similar expressions used by two other

writers of the time,” would seem to imply that John had

been count of Mortain before Henry's death, and that

Richard merely confirmed to him a possession and a dignity

which he already enjoyed. John, however, is never styled

1 189

* Gesta Ric. vol. ii. pp. 72, 73.

* “Paternae in Hibernia acquisitionis plenitudinem et comitatum in Nor-

mannia Moritanensem, de quibus scilicet paternam donationem ratam habuit”

[Ricardus], W. Newb. l. iv. c. 3. “Comitatum de Moritonio, quem dono

patris pridem perceperat” [Johannes], Ric. Devizes (Howlett, Chronn. of

Stephen, etc., vol. iii.), p. 385. Cf. above, p. 6.

24 -


w

“count” during Henry's lifetime; *... and the real meaning of

the historians seems to be that Henry had in his latter days

reverted to his early project of making John count of Mor-

tain, but had never carried it into effect, probably because

he could not do so without Richard's assent. Richard's

grant was thus an entirely new one, though made in fulfil-

ment of his father's desire. It set John in the foremost

rank among the barons of Normandy, though the income

which it brought him was not very large. The grant of

lands in England, said to have been made to him at the

same time, can only have been a promise ; Richard was not

yet crowned, and therefore not yet legally capable of grant-

ing anything in England at all. On his arrival there in

August, one of his first acts was to secure the Gloucester

heritage for John by causing him to be married to Isabel.

The wedding took place at Marlborough on August 29.”

Five days later the king was crowned ; John figured at the

coronation as “Earl of Mortain and Gloucester,” and walked

before his brother in the procession, carrying one of the

three swords of state, between Earl David of Huntingdon

and Earl Robert of Leicester, who bore the other two

swords.”

At the end of the month, or early in October, Richard

despatched John at the head of an armed force, to secure

for the new king the homage of the Welsh princes. They

all, save one, came to meet John at Worcester, and “made

a treaty of peace” with him as his brother's representative.

The exception was Rees of South Wales, who was in active

hostility to the English Crown,” being at that very time en-

gaged in besieging Caermarthen castle. John led “the host

of all England" to Caermarthen, the siege was raised,” and

Rees accompanied John back to England for a meeting with

Richard at Oxford; Richard, however, declined the inter-

view." His refusal may have been due to some suspicion

1 The biographer of William the Marshal, indeed, does on two occasions

before Henry's death speak of “le conte Johan,” “li quens Johan" (vv. 8543,

9078). But although in one sense contemporary, he did not write till after

1219; his use of the title therefore proves nothing.

* Gesta Ric. p. 78. * Ib. pp. 80, 81. * Ib. pp. 87, 88.

* Ann. Cambr. p. 57. * Gesta Ric. p. 97.

1189


26 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

1189

of a private agreement between Rees and John which is

asserted in the Welsh annals;” but his suspicions, if he had

any, did not prevent him from continuing, almost to the eve

of his own departure from England, to develope an elaborate

scheme of provision for John. The very first step in this

scheme had already led to trouble, though the trouble was

easily overcome. John and Isabel had been married with-

out a dispensation and in defiance of Archbishop Baldwin of

Canterbury, who had forbidden, as contrary to canon law,

a union between cousins under such circumstances. After

the marriage had taken place he declared it invalid, and

laid an interdict upon the lands of the guilty couple.

John, however, appealed to Rome, and got the better of the

primate; in November the interdict was raised by a papal

legate.”

The Pipe Roll drawn up a month after John's marriage

shows him as holding, besides his wife's honour of Gloucester,

the honours of Peverel, Lancaster and Tickhill, two manors

in Suffolk, three in Worcestershire, and some lands in North-

amptonshire, together with the profits of the Forest of Sher-

wood in Nottinghamshire and of that of Andover in Wilt-

shire. All these grants were construed as liberally as possible

in John's favour; he was allowed the profits of the two

forests for a whole year past, and the revenues of the other

lands for a quarter of a year, while the third penny of

Gloucestershire was reckoned as due to him for half a year

—that is, from a date five months before his investiture with

the earldom.” The grants of Peverel's honour and Lancaster

included the castles *; in the cases of Tickhill and Gloucester

the castles were reserved by the king, and so too, apparently,

was a castle on one of John's Suffolk manors, Orford.”

* Ann. Cambr. p. 57. * R. Diceto, vol. ii. pp. 72, 73.

* Gloucester (honour), Pipe Roll I Ric. I. p. 7; Lancaster, p. 18; Orford

(Suffolk), p. 40; Staverton (ib.), p. 54; Hanley, Edersfield and Bisley

(Worcestershire), p. 25o; Hecham (Northamptonshire), p. 97; “other lands” in

Northamptonshire, p. 104; Sherwood, p. 172; Andover, ib.; Goucestershire,

third penny, p. 163.

P ! Gesta Ric. p. 78. The Peverel castles were those of Bolsover and the

€a.k.

* Tickhill castle appears as garrisoned by the Crown in Pipe Roll 2 Ric. I.

(1190) m. 7; so does Orford in 1191-92, P.R. 5 Ric. I. (1193) m. 2 (among


------

-— v - - K

. . . . .” º




John's

Royal castles

within John's lands, Tickhill

ENGLAND, A.D. 119 O.

lands E

London: Macmillan & Co.,Ltd.

Stanford's Geogº Estab:London,












Four other honours appear to have been given to John

at this time — Marlborough and Luggershall, including

their castles; Eye and Wallingford, seemingly without

their castles." The aggregate value of all these lands

would be about £1 170; but a much greater gift soon

followed. Before the end of the year six whole counties

—Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Dorset, Somerset, Devon

and Cornwall—were added to the portion of the count of

Mortain. The words in which this grant is recorded by

the chroniclers convey a very inadequate idea of its real

importance; taken by themselves, they might be understood

to mean merely that Richard gave his brother the title and

the third penny of the revenue from each of the counties

named.” That what he actually did give was something very

different we learn from the Pipe Rolls, or rather from the

significant omission which is conspicuous in them for the

next five years. From Michaelmas I 189 to Michaelmas

I 194 these six counties made no appearance at all in the

royal accounts. They sent no returns of any kind to the

accounts “de veteri firma” of Suffolk); Gloucester castle was repaired by the

sheriff of the county in 1191, P.R. 3 Ric. I. m. 12; Bristol, the other great

castle of the Gloucester earldom, was held by the Crown in 1192, P.R. 4 Ric.

I. m. 20.

* For Marlborough, Wallingford and Luggershall, see Gesta Ric. p. 78;

Eye is added by R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 6. There is no mention of any of

these in the Pipe Rolls of 1188-93, except that the men of the soke of Eye

pay tallage to the Crown in 1190 (P.R. 2 Ric. I. m. 9 d), and that in 1192 the

sheriff of Suffolk charges for livery of a garrison in Eye castle for a year (i.e.

Michaelmas 1191 to Michaelmas 1192; P.R. 5 Ric. I. m. 2, among accounts

“de veteri firma” of Suffolk).

* “Eodem mense [Decembri) Ricardus Rex Angliae dedit Johanni fratri suo

in augmentum comitatum Cornubiae, et comitatum Devoniae, et comitatum de

Dorset, et comitatum de Sumerseta,” Gesta Ric. p. 99. According to this

writer, Richard had granted to John “villam de Notingham cum honore illo

... et Derebisiram ” at the same time as Gloucester, Lancaster, etc. (ib. p.

78). But the sheriffs of all six shires account for them to the Crown up to

Michaelmas in Pipe Roll I Ric. I. ; so they must all have been granted after

that date. “Villam de Notingham cum honore illo” stands for the town and

the shire; there was no “honour” of that name. W. Newburgh, though his

list of John's counties is very incomplete (l. iv. c. 3), rightly mentions “Notinge-

hamesciram ” as one of them; it disappears from the Pipe Rolls like the other

five after Michaelmas 1189. Sherwood Forest disappears likewise, being in-

cluded in the shire. On the other hand, later events show that Nottingham

castle was retained by the Crown. At this period Nottinghamshire and Derby-

shire, Dorset and Somerset, Cornwall and Devonshire, were always administered

and accounted for in pairs.

I 189


28 JOHN LACKLAND CHAP.

royal treasury; they were visited by no justices appointed

by the king. In a word, just as Chester and Durham were

palatinates in the hands of earl and bishop respectively, so

John's two counties in mid-England and four in the south-

west formed a great palatinate in his hands. He received

and retained their ferms and the profits of justice and

administration within their borders, and ruled them absolutely

at his own will, the Crown claiming from him no account for

them whatever.

The total revenue which the Crown had derived from

these six counties in the year immediately preceding their

transfer to John was a little over £4000." But their money

value was a consideration of trifling importance compared

with the territorial and political power which accompanied it.

Such an accumulation of palatine jurisdictions in the hands

of one man was practically equivalent to the setting up

of an under-kingdom, with a king uncrowned indeed, but

absolutely independent of every secular authority except the

supreme king himself; and that exception, as every one

knew, was only for the moment; Richard was on the eve of

his departure for the Holy Land, and as soon as he was out

of reach John would have, within his little realm, practically

no superior at all. Moreover, his “lordship of Ireland ”

had changed its character at his father's death. Until

then it had been, save during his five months' visit to that

country in 1185, merely titular. Most of the few known

charters and grants issued in his name during his father's

lifetime are dateless, and it seems possible that, with one

exception, all of them may have been issued during that

visit.” On Henry's death, however, John's lordship of the

English March in Ireland became something more than a

name. In virtue of it he already possessed a staff of house-

hold officers whose titles and functions reproduced those of

1 189

* Stubbs, pref. to R. Howden, vol. iii. p. xxv. note 4.

* Gilbert, Hist. Doc. of Ireland, p. 49; Rot. Canc. Hib. Cal. vol. i. pt. i.

pp. 1, 3 ; Carte, Life of Ormonde (ed. 1851), vol. i. introd. pp. xlv. xlvi;

Hist. MSS. Commission, 3rd Report, p. 231 ; Harris's Ware, Antiq. Hibern.

p. 197. The exception referred to is a grant of land in Ireland, without date of

day or year, but issued by “Johannes filius Regis Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae,”

“apud Ceneman’,” i.e. Le Mans, and witnessed by John the Marshal, “dapifer

Johannis,” Rot. Canc. Hib. Cal. vol. i. pt. i. p. 3.


the royal household itself. Henry had had his seneschal,

his butler, his constable for Ireland as well as for England;

and this Irish household establishment had apparently been

transferred to John, at any rate since I 185. No doubt the

men of whom it consisted were appointed by Henry, or

at least with his sanction, and were in fact his ministers

rather than the ministers of his son; but to the new king

they owed no obedience save the general obedience due

from all English or Norman subjects; from the hour of

Henry's death their service belonged to the “Lord of

Ireland” alone, and John thus found himself at the head

of a little court of his own, a ready-made ministry through

which he might govern both his Irish dominion and the

ample possessions which Richard bestowed upon him in

England, as freely as the rest of the English realm was

governed by Richard himself through the ministers of the

Crown."

Of the way in which John was likely to use his new

independence he had already given a significant indication.

Shortly after Richard's accession the wardship of the heiress

of Leinster, Isabel de Clare, was terminated by her marriage

with William the Marshal.” Her great Irish fief, as well as

her English and Welsh lands, thus passed into the hands of

a man who was already one of the most trusted friends and

counsellors of Richard, as he had been of Henry, and whose

brother had once been seneschal to John himself.” No

sooner had William entered upon the heritage of his wife

than John disseised him of a portion of Leinster and par-

celled it out among friends of his own. The Marshal

appealed to Richard ; Richard insisted upon John's making

restitution, and John, after some demur, was compelled to

yield, but not entirely; he managed to secure the ratification

of a grant which he had made to his butler, Theobald

* We hear of John's chancellor, Stephen Ridel, in 1191, Gesta Ric. p. 224;

of his seneschal, William de Kahanger, and his butler, Theobald Walter, in

1192, Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 55. We have seen already that at some date

between 1185 and 1189 he had as “dapifer” no less a personage than John the

Marshal; and in 1191 Roger de Planes appears as “in tota terra comitis Johannis

justiciarius,” R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 99.

* Gesta Ric. p. 73. * See above, p. 28, note 2.

I 189


30 JOHN LACKLAND - chap.

Walter, out of the Marshal's lands, although, by way of

compromise, it was settled that Theobald should hold the

estate in question as an under-tenant of William, not as a

tenant-in-chief of John." On the other hand, John did not

at once displace the governor whom his father had set over

the Irish march four years before, John de Courcy. He had

no thought of undertaking the personal government of his

dominions in Ireland. To do so he must have turned his

back upon the opportunities which Richard's misplaced

generosity was opening to him in England—opportunities

of which it was not difficult to foresee the effect upon such a

mind as his. As William of Newburgh says, “The enjoy-

ment of a tetrarchy made him covet a monarchy.””

That Richard presently awoke to some consciousness of

the danger which he had created for himself and his realm

may be inferred from the fact that in February 1 190 he

summoned John to Normandy, and there made him swear

not to set foot in England for the next three years. The

queen-mother, however, afterwards persuaded her elder son

to release the younger one from this oath; * or, according to

another account, to leave the decision of the matter to the

justiciar and chancellor, William of Longchamp, bishop of

Ely. John was to visit the chancellor in England, and

either remain there or go into exile, as William might

choose." It is clear, however, that William had no real

choice. He was legate in England, and therefore absolution

from him was necessary to protect John against the ecclesi-

astical consequences of a violated oath ; but as the violation

was sanctioned by the king to whom the oath had been

sworn, no ground was left to William for refusing the

absolution.

In the course of the year I 190, therefore, or very early

in 1191, John returned to England.” In February 1 191

the sole remaining check upon both John and William of

Longchamp was removed : Queen Eleanor went to join her

1189

I 190

* Hist, de G. le Mar, vv. 9581-618. See charters in Carte's Life of

Ormonde (1851), vol. i. introd. p. xlvi.

* W. Newb. l. iv. c. 3. * Gesta Ric. p. 106.

* R. Devizes, p. 392.

* Stubbs, pref. to R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 41.


elder son at Messina." As soon as she was gone, the results

of the concession which he had made to her wishes in John's

behalf began to show themselves. On Mid-Lent Sunday,

March 24, the count of Mortain and the chancellor had

an interview at Winchester “concerning the keepers of

certain castles, and the money granted to the count by his

brother out of the exchequer.”” What passed between them

we are not told ; but it is clear that they disagreed. Three

months elapsed without any overt act of aggression on either

side. Then, all at once, about midsummer, it became

apparent that a party which for more than a year had been

seeking an opportunity to undermine the chancellor's power

had found a rallying-point and a leader in the king's brother.

The sheriff of Lincolnshire and constable of Lincoln Castle,

Gerard de Camville, being summoned to answer before the

justiciars for having made his great fortress into a hold of

robbers and bandits, defied their authority on the plea that

he had become John's liegeman, and was therefore answer-

able to no one except John.” The chancellor deprived

Gerard of his sheriffdom and gave it to another man, and

laid siege to Lincoln Castle.” While he was thus occupied,

the castles of Nottingham and Tickhill were given up by

their custodians to John.” Thereupon John sent to the

chancellor a message of insolent defiance. If William did

not at once withdraw from Lincoln and leave Gerard in

unmolested possession, the count of Mortain threatened to

“come and visit him with a rod of iron, and with such a

host as he would not be able to withstand.”" With a

cutting allusion at once to the chancellor's humble origin

and to the readiness with which the commandants of

Nottingham and Tickhill had betrayed the fortresses com-

mitted to their charge, he added that “no good came of

depriving lawful freeborn Englishmen of the offices of trust

* Gesta Ric. p. 157. * R. Devizes, p. 402.

* R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 242, 243. Cf. W. Newb. l. iv. c. 16, and R.

Devizes, p. 406.

* Gesta Ric. p. 207; R. Howden, vol. iii. p. 134. Cf. W. Newb. l.c.

Gerard was constable of Lincoln in right of his wife, Nicola de Haye.

* R. Devizes, p. 407; Gesta Ric. p. 207. Cf. W. Newb. 1. iv. c. 16.

6 Gesta Ric. l.c.

I 191


I 191

to which they were entitled, and giving them to unknown

strangers; the folly of such a proceeding had just been

proved in the case of the royal castles which William had

entrusted to men who left them exposed to every passer-by;

any chance comer would have found their gates open to him

as easily as they had opened to John himself. Such a state

of affairs in his brother's realm he was resolved to tolerate

no longer.” The chancellor's retort was a peremptory sum-

mons to John to give up the two castles, and “answer before

the king's court for the breach of his oath.”* William

probably hoped to get John expelled from England, on the

plea that Richard had never really consented to his return

and that his absolution was therefore invalid, as having been

extorted on a false pretence. The summons appears to

have been carried by Archbishop Walter of Rouen, who had

come from Messina charged with a special commission from

Richard to deal with the crisis in England.” John, on

receiving the chancellor's message, burst into one of the

paroxysms of fury characteristic of his race. “He was

more than angry,” says a contemporary; “his whole body

was so contorted with rage as to be scarcely recognizable;

a scowl of wrath furrowed his brow; his eyes flashed fire,

his colour changed to a livid white, and I know what would

have become of the chancellor if in that hour of fury he had

come within reach of John's hands !” In the end, however,

the archbishop persuaded both John and William to hold

another conference at Winchester on July 28.” -

John secured the services of four thousand armed Welsh-

men, whom he apparently brought up secretly, in small

parties, from the border, and hid in various places round

about the city. No disturbance, however, took place; some of

the bishops, under the direction of Walter of Rouen, drew

up a scheme of agreement which, for the moment, both John

and William found it advisable to accept. The castles of

Nottingham and Tickhill were surrendered by John to the

* R. Devizes, pp. 407, 408.

* Walter left Messina April 2 (cf. JR. Howden, vol. iii. p. 100 ; Itin.

Aºic. Reg. p. 176, and R. Devizes, p. 404), and landed either about midsummer

(Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 497), or, more probably, April 27 (see Bishop Stubbs's

note to R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 90). * R. Devizes, p. 408.


king in the person of his special representative the arch-

bishop of Rouen, who was to give them in charge, one to

William of Venneval—a liegeman of the king, but a friend

and follower of John—the other to William the Marshal;

these two custodians were to hold them for the king till his

return, and then “act according to his will concerning them”;

but if he should die, or if meanwhile the chancellor should

break the peace with John, they were to restore them to

John. New custodians were appointed, on the like terms,

to six royal castles which stood within John's territories,”

and also to two castles which Richard had expressly granted

to him, Bolsover and the Peak. Any new castles built since

the king's departure were to be razed, and no more were to

be built till his return, save, if necessary, on the royal demesnes,

or elsewhere in pursuance of special orders, written or verbal,

from himself. No man was to be disseised either by the

king's ministers or by the count of Mortain, save in execu-

tion of a legal sentence delivered after trial before the king's

court; and each party was pledged to amend, on complaint

from the other, its own infringements of this rule, which was

at once applied to the case of Gerard de Camville. Gerard,

having been disseised without trial, was reinstated in his

sheriffdom ; but his reinstatement was ordered to be im-

mediately followed by a trial before the Curia Regis on the

charges brought against him, and the decision of the Curia

was to be final ; if it went against him, John was not to

support him in resistance to it; and John was further bound

not to harbour any known outlaws or enemies of the king,

nor any person accused of treason, except on condition of

such person pledging himself to stand his trial in the king's

court. The archbishop of Rouen received a promise from

John and from the chancellor, each supported by seven

sureties, that they would keep this agreement. After it was

drawn up, a postscript appears to have been added: “If any

thing should be taken or intercepted by either party during

1 Wallingford, Eye, Bristol, Exeter, Launceston and “Hereford”; R.

Howden, vol. iii. p. 136. Hereford is quite out of place among “castra de

honoribus a domino rege sibi” [i.e. Johanni] “datis.” The name may be a

mistake for Oxford; see above, p. 26.

D

I 191

July 28


the truce, it shall be lawfully restored and amends made for

it. And these things are done, saving always the authority

and commands of our lord the king; yet so that if the king

before his return should not will this agreement to be kept,

the aforesaid castles of Nottingham and Tickhill shall be

given up to Lord John, whatever the king may order con-

cerning them.” The last clause is obscure; but its meaning

seems to be that if the arrangement just made should prove

to be, in the judgment of the king's ministers, untenable, it

was to be treated as void, and matters were to be restored

to the position in which they had been before it was

made." -

The contingency which seems to have been contemplated

in this postscript very soon occurred. Some mercenaries

whom the chancellor had summoned from over sea landed

in England, and he at once repudiated the agreement,

declaring there should be no peace till either he or John

was driven out of the realm.” Hereupon it seems that

Venneval and the Marshal, in accordance with the clause

above quoted, restored the castles of Tickhill and Nottingham

to John. On the other hand, an outrage on John's part,

which is recorded only as having occurred some time in this

year (1191), certainly took place before October, and most

likely before the middle of September. Roger de Lacy, the

constable of Chester, who was responsible to Longchamp for

the safe keeping of these two castles, made a vigorous effort

I 191

* R. Howden, vol. iii. pp. 135-7. One other clause in the agreement

may be noticed. After the provisions about the castles already mentioned, it is

added : “Sed et tria castella ad coronam domini regis pertinentia, scilicet

castellum de Windeshoveres comiti de Arundel; castellum de Wintonia Gilleberto

de Lasci; castellum de Northampton Simoni de Pateshille, tradita sunt custo-

dienda; qui fidelitatem domini Regis de ipsis ad opus ipsius fideliter custodiendis

juraverunt,” ib. p. 136. The earl of Arundel figures, at the end of the docu-

ment, as one of the chancellor's sureties, and the Lacys were in close alliance with

the Longchamps; taken by itself, therefore, this clause would seem to indicate a

change of custodians made at the chancellor's desire, and dictated by a discovery

or suspicion that the actual commandants of these three castles were in treason-

able alliance with John. But the Pipe Rolls show that the appointment of

Simon de Pateshill implied no change at all, for he had custody of Northampton

castle without interruption from Michaelmas 1189 to Michaelmas 1191 (P.R.

2 Ric. I. m.,4; 3 Ric. I. m. 1); while the other appointments were speedily

annulled, owing to the breakdown of the whole agreement.

2 W. Newb. l. iv. c. 16.


to bring to justice the subordinate castellans to whom he had

entrusted them, and who had betrayed them to John. Of

these there had been two in each castle. Two managed to

keep out of Lacy's reach; the other two he caught and

hanged, although one of them offered to swear with com-

purgators that he had never consented to the treason of his

colleague, and even brought a letter from John requesting

that the compurgation might be allowed—the chancellor, to

whom the question had been referred, having remitted it to

the decision of Lacy. While this man's body was hanging

in chains, his squire drove the birds away from it; where-

upon Roger de Lacy hanged the squire. Then John took

upon himself to avenge them both, not only by disseising

Roger of all the lands which he held of him, but also by

ravaging the lands which Roger possessed elsewhere."

Some time in August or September another assembly

was called to endeavour after a pacification between John

and the chancellor. Three bishops and twenty-two lay-

men were appointed arbitrators—the laymen chosen by the

bishops, eleven from the party which had hitherto adhered

to William, eleven from the followers of John. The terms

which these twenty-five laid down amounted to a decision

wholly in John's favour. They did, indeed, again require

him to restore the two royal castles of Nottingham and

Tickhill ; but they made the restoration an empty form.

They decreed that the chancellor should put these castles

under the control of two men whom they named, William

of Venneval and another friend of John's, Reginald de

Vasseville. These two were to hold the castles for the king

and give William hostages for their fidelity; but if Richard

should die before reaching home, they were at once to

surrender the castles to John, and William was to restore

their hostages. The arbitrators further confirmed Gerard

de Camville in the constableship of Lincoln castle; they

ordered the chancellor to remove the constables of royal

castles situated within the lands of the count of Mortain,

and appoint others in their stead, “if the count showed reason

for changing them "; and they added that “if the king

1 Gesta Ric. pp. 232, 234.

I 191


36 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

should die, the chancellor was not to disinherit the count,

but to do his utmost to promote him to the kindgom.””

This last clause was pointed at a negotiation which William

had been carrying on with the Scot king, for the purpose

of obtaining his recognition of Arthur of Britanny as heir-

presumptive to the English Crown. The negotiation was

secret; but John had discovered it,” and the discovery was

a useful weapon in his hands. William's dealings with

Scotland were most probably sanctioned by Richard ; their

object was certainly in accord with Richard's own plans for

the succession at this time; but Richard's choice of Arthur as

his heir was probably unknown as yet to the majority of his

subjects, and if it was known to them, it could not commend

itself to their ideas either of policy or of constitutional

practice. In their eyes the king's next-of-kin and natural

successor was not his boy-nephew, but his brother. It was

therefore easy for John to win their sympathies by

representing the scheme as part of a plot contrived against

himself by the chancellor.

The new agreement lasted no longer than its predecessor.

Scarcely was it drawn up when there occurred an excellent

opportunity for John to secure for himself a new and valuable

ally in the person of his half-brother Geoffrey, the eldest son

of Henry II. and the predecessor of Longchamp in the office

of chancellor of England. Geoffrey, like John, had in the

spring of 1 190 been sworn to keep out of England for three

years; but, like John too, he had obtained from Richard a

release from his oath.” His election to the see of York had

been confirmed by the Pope on May 1 1, 1 191,4 and it was

known that he intended to return to England immediately

after his consecration.” Richard had given him a written

release from his vow of absence,” but had neglected to

1 191

* R. Devizes, pp. 409, 410. The date which he has appended to the agree-

ment is impossible, not only for this particular document, but for any personal

meeting of John and the chancellor this year at Winchester, where he places

it. See Round, Commune of London, p. 214, and Cal. Doc. France, vol. i. p.

17. As to the agreement itself, cf. W. Newb. l. iv. c. 16.

* W. Newb. l. iv. c. 14.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. p. 382.

* Monast. Angl. vol. vi. pt. iii. p. 1188.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. p. 389. ° Ib. p. 382.


apprise the chancellor of the fact; William therefore no

sooner heard of Geoffrey's purpose to return than he issued,

on July 30, a writ ordering that the archbishop should be

arrested on landing." Geoffrey had written to John, begging

for his help ; John in reply promised to stand by him.” On

August 18 Geoffrey was consecrated at Tours,” and John

then urged him to come over at once.” On September 14

Geoffrey reached Dover; he escaped from an attempt to

arrest him as he landed, but four days later he was forcibly

dragged from sanctuary in S. Martin's priory and flung into

prison in the castle."

John immediately wrote to the chancellor, demanding

whether these things had been done by his authority.

According to one account, William answered that they had."

A letter from William himself to the chapter of Canterbury,

however, declares that he had merely ordered his officers to

administer to Geoffrey the oath of fealty to the king (which

it was usual for a bishop to take before entering upon his

see), and if he refused it, to send him back to the Continent."

However this might be, it is clear that, outwardly at least,

the chancellor had put himself in the wrong. He was

already the most unpopular man in England; now, all

parties in Church and State joined hands against him at

once; and it was inevitable that they should rally under the

command of John. John sent another letter or message to

William, bidding him release the archbishop, and swearing

that if this were not done immediately, he, the count of

Mortain, would go in person “with a mighty hand and a

stretched - out arm " to set his brother at liberty.” On

September 21 or 26 Geoffrey was released.” Meanwhile

John, with his confidant Hugh of Nonant, the bishop of

Coventry, hurried down from Lancaster to Marlborough,

1 Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. p. 389. * R. Devizes, p. 410.

* R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 96. * Gesta Ric. p. 210.

5 R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 97; Gir. Cambr. vol. iv. pp. 388-93; R. Devizes,

pp. 4II, 412.

*:Gesta Ric. p. 211.

7 Epp. Cantuar. pp. 344, 345; Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 506. Cf. R. Devizes,

p. 413.

8 Gesta Ric. p. 211.

9 September 21, R. Devizes, p. 412; September 26, R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 97.

I 191


and invited all whom he thought likely to take his side to

join him there. Three of the co-justiciars—William the

Marshal among them—answered his call; three bishops, one

of whom was the venerated Hugh of Lincoln, did likewise ;

and so did Archbishop Walter of Rouen. From Marlborough

the party moved on to Reading; thence John despatched

a personal invitation, or summons, to Geoffrey," and at the

same time issued, in conjunction with the three justiciars,

letters calling the rest of the bishops and barons to a council

to be holden on October 5 at the bridge over the Lodden

between Reading and Windsor, and a summons to the

chancellor to appear there and answer for his conduct.”

William retorted by issuing counter writs, summoning all

those who had joined the count of Mortain to withdraw

from him, “forasmuch as he was endeavouring to usurp the

kingdom to himself.”*

John and all his party came to the Lodden bridge on the

day which they had appointed ; the chancellor, who was at

Windsor, sent the bishop of London and three earls to

excuse his absence on the plea of illness. The outcome of

the day's discussion was that the assembly, by the voice

of Walter of Rouen, pledged itself to depose William from

the office of chief justiciar. 