 There can hardly be a reasonable doubt that he made use of
 Philip’s ambition for a purpose of his own, a purpose which was really
 the direct opposite of that which Philip had in view--the purpose, not
 of crushing England, but of winning her back to the Roman alliance, and
 thus securing her as a counterpoise, in case of need, to the power of
 Philip himself.[795] In a word, Innocent and John had simultaneously
 recognized the fact that, in the interest of both alike, the time for
 their reconciliation had come.
 
 John, as we have seen, had paved the way by offering, at the close
 of 1212, his acceptance of the terms proposed by the Pope in 1211.
 Innocent’s reply to this offer was written on February 27, 1213.
 Although, he said, he considered himself no longer bound by his own
 terms, since the king had rejected them, yet for the sake of peace he
 was willing to abide by the form of agreement thus again proposed, if
 before June 1 the king would, by an oath sworn in his presence by four
 barons, and by letters patent addressed to the archbishop of Canterbury
 and the other exiled bishops, promise to keep it faithfully and fulfil
 it effectually, “according to the expositions and explanations which
 we have thought good to be set forth for the removal of all scruple
 and doubt.” In May, when all England was expecting the attack of
 Philip Augustus, three of John’s messengers brought back from Rome
 this letter, together with a copy of the form originally committed
 to Pandulf and Durand, and the “expositions and explanations” of the
 arrangements now required on both sides to insure its execution.[796]
 All these documents seem to have been communicated to Pandulf in
 a private interview which he had with the Pope on the eve of his
 departure from Rome in January;[797] at any rate he was well aware of
 their contents and fully instructed how to act in consequence. Just
 as the French fleet was ready to sail, he in the Pope’s name forbade
 all further proceedings against England till he should have once more
 appealed to John and learned whether he would yet repent.[798] Close
 upon the return of the English envoys from Rome followed two Templars,
 who landed at Dover with a message from Pandulf to the king, requesting
 an interview. It took place at Dover on May 13. In presence of king
 and legate, the earls of Salisbury, Warren, and Ferrars and the count
 of Boulogne swore in John’s behalf the oath of security required by
 Innocent; and on the same day John published by letters patent the
 agreement concluded between himself and Pandulf in the form which the
 Pope had prescribed.[799]
 
 Two days later--on Wednesday, May 15--king and legate met again, “with
 the great men of the realm,” in the house of the Knights Templars
 at Ewell, near Dover. There, by a charter attested by himself, the
 archbishop of Dublin, the chief justiciars of England and Ireland,
 seven earls (of whom the Marshal was one), and three barons, the king
 “granted and freely surrendered to God and His holy Apostles Peter and
 Paul, and to the Holy Mother Church of Rome, and to Pope Innocent and
 his Catholic successors,” the whole realm of England and “the whole
 realm of Ireland,” with all rights thereunto appertaining, to receive
 them back and hold them thenceforth as a feudatary of God and the
 Roman Church. He swore fealty to the Pope for both realms in Pandulf’s
 presence, promised to perform liege homage to the Pope in person if
 he should ever have an opportunity of so doing, and pledged all his
 successors to a like engagement, besides undertaking to furnish the
 Roman see with a yearly sum of one thousand marks--seven hundred for
 England and three hundred for Ireland.[800]
 
 One English chronicler says that John, in performing this homage, acted
 “according to what had been decreed at Rome.”[801] Another, not less
 generally accurate and well informed, says that John “added it of his
 own accord” to the agreement already completed.[802] On the whole,
 it is probable that this latter account of the matter is the correct
 one, at least thus far, that the scheme originated not at Rome, but
 in England. Not much weight can indeed be attached to the king’s own
 assertion, made in the charter of homage itself, that the act was a
 voluntary one, which he had done by way of penance and humiliation for
 his offences, “not urged by force nor compelled by fear, but of our
 own good free will and by the common counsel of our barons”;[803] nor
 is the accuracy of this version of the transaction proved by the fact
 that Innocent accepted it without remark in his reply to John’s letters
 on the subject,[804] and that no extant document emanating from the
 court of Rome contains the slightest indication that the Pope had ever
 demanded or suggested any proceeding of the kind. There is, however,
 no perceptible reason why Innocent should have required of John a
 penance of so extraordinary a character, nor why, if he did require
 it, either he or his royal penitent should make a secret of his having
 done so. On the other hand, John had a very cogent reason for “adding
 something of his own” to the agreement between himself and Innocent.
 If he was to give up all for which he had been fighting--and fighting
 successfully--against the Pope and the Church for the last six years,
 he must make quite sure of gaining such an advantage as would be worth
 the sacrifice. Mere release from excommunication and interdict was
 certainly, in his eyes, not worth any sacrifice at all. To change the
 Pope from an enemy into a political friend was worth it, but--from
 John’s point of view--only if the friendship could be made something
 much more close and indissoluble than the ordinary official relation
 between the Pope and every Christian sovereign. He must bind the Pope
 to his personal interest by some special tie of such a nature that the
 interest of the Papacy itself would prevent Innocent from casting it
 off or breaking it. For a sovereign of John’s character no additional
 sacrifice would be involved in the device which he actually employed
 for this purpose. To outward personal humiliation of any kind John was
 absolutely indifferent, when there was any advantage to be gained by
 undergoing it. To any humiliation which the Crown or the nation might
 suffer in his person, he was indifferent under all circumstances. His
 plighted faith he had never had a moment’s hesitation in breaking,
 whether it were sworn to his father, his brother, his allies, or his
 people, and which he would break with equal facility when sworn to the
 supreme Pontiff; moreover, he took the precaution of inserting in his
 charter a saving clause which he could easily have interpreted, had
 occasion ever arisen, so as to reduce the whole transaction to a mere
 empty form.[805] There seems, in short, to be good reason for believing
 that John’s homage to the Pope was offered without any pressure from
 Rome, and on grounds of deliberate policy.[806]
 
 How far the credit or discredit--whichever it be--of that policy
 belongs to John is, however, a question not easily solved. Two
 years later, the English barons seem to have claimed the credit for
 themselves. We are told that they besought the Pope, “as he was lord
 of England,” to take their part against John, “since he well knew
 that they had at his command boldly opposed the king in behalf of the
 Church’s liberty, and that the king had granted an annual revenue to
 Rome, and bestowed other honours on the Pope and the Roman Church,
 not of his own accord, but only out of fear and under compulsion from
 them.”[807]
 
 This, if correctly reported, is a distinct assertion by the malcontent
 barons that they had deliberately chosen to set up the Pope as temporal
 overlord of their country, and that it was pressure from them which
 had compelled John to do him homage as such. The truth probably lies
 half-way between this version and that of the king. Whether the “common
 counsel of the barons” was given spontaneously to John and accepted by
 him, or whether it was merely a response to a proposal which he had
 laid before them, there can be little doubt that each party adopted the
 scheme in the hope of turning it to account against the other party.
 That on the side of the barons this hope proved utterly delusive, while
 on the side of John it was completely realized, simply shows once more
 how far less than a match was the collective sagacity of the barons for
 the single-handed dexterity of the king.
 
 It was not till many years later that a great historian, who was also a
 vehement partisan, denounced John’s homage to the Pope as “a thing to
 be detested for all time.”[808] The Barnwell annalist, writing at the
 time of the event, tells us indeed that “to many it seemed ignominious,
 and a heavy yoke of servitude.” But the action of all parties at the
 moment was a practical acknowledgement of their consciousness that, as
 the same annalist says, John “by this act provided prudently both for
 himself and for his people; for matters were in such a strait, and so
 great was the fear on all sides, that there was no more ready way of
 evading the imminent peril--perhaps no other way at all. For when once
 he had put himself under Apostolical protection, and made his realms
 a part of the patrimony of S. Peter, there was not in the Roman world
 a sovereign who durst attack him, or invade them; inasmuch as Pope
 Innocent was universally held in awe above all his predecessors for
 many years past.”[809]
 
 John had, in fact, at one stroke cut the ground from under the feet
 of all his enemies both at home and abroad. The people resumed their
 ordinary attitude of loyalty on Pandulf’s assurance that it was once
 more, and more than ever, sanctioned by the Church. The traitor barons
 found themselves without a cloak for their treason, and were reduced
 to send out letters patent repudiating all connexion with the French
 king.[810] Philip found himself without an ally, and without an excuse
 for his enterprise. The believers in Peter of Wakefield, indeed, still
 looked forward with a vague expectation to Ascension Day {May 23}. But
 the king himself could meet its dawn without fear. He had ordered his
 royal tent to be set up in a large open field, and caused his heralds
 to proclaim a general invitation to all who were within reach, to come
 and spend the festival day in stately festivities with him. “And a
 right joyous day it was, the king taking his pleasure and making merry
 with the bishops and nobles who had come together at his call.”[811]
 Still Peter’s disciples were not convinced; some of them took up the
 idea that the prediction might refer not to the ecclesiastical but to
 the civil anniversary of John’s coronation, May 27, which in 1213 was
 four days after Ascension Day. This anniversary, however, passed over
 likewise without any mishap. Then the wise and the foolish alike began
 to see that John had prevented a literal fulfilment of the prophecy
 by lending himself to a figurative one. He had “ceased to be king”
 by laying his crown at the feet of Pandulf, to take it back again
 on conditions which unquestionably helped to fix it, for the time
 at least, more securely than ever on his brow. The scapegoat of all
 parties was the unlucky prophet himself. Next day he and his son, who
 had been imprisoned with him, were tied each to a horse’s tail, dragged
 thus from Corfe to Wareham, and there hanged.[812]
 
 Pandulf meanwhile had returned to France, and commanded Philip, on
 pain of the Pope’s displeasure, to lay aside all thoughts of invading
 England and go home in peace. Philip at first indignantly refused
 to abandon a scheme which, he said, he had planned at the Pope’s
 instigation, and for which he had already spent more than sixty
 thousand pounds.[813] But he dared not go on in the teeth of the papal
 prohibition; so he turned his wrath upon the one great feudatary of his
 realm who had refused to take part in the projected invasion, Count
 Ferrand of Flanders. Ordering his fleet to sail round as quickly as
 possible to Swine, the king dashed into Flanders at the head of all
 his forces. Ferrand besought help of John, with whom he was already in
 alliance; and John at once despatched five hundred ships, carrying a
 large body of horse and foot under the command of his half-brother Earl
 William of Salisbury and the counts of Holland and Boulogne.[814] They
 sailed on Tuesday, May 28, intending to land at Swine and march across
 the country to join Ferrand; but a contrary wind delayed them so that
 they did not reach Swine till Thursday, the 30th; and then, to their
 amazement, they found the harbour occupied by the French fleet, which,
 however, they soon discovered to be unguarded save by a few seamen, all
 the troops having gone ashore to ravage the neighbourhood. Salisbury
 at once ordered an attack; the French sailors were speedily overcome;
 three hundred ships laden with provisions were set drifting towards
 England, a hundred more were rifled of their contents and then set on
 fire. “Never came so much wealth into England since King Arthur went
 to conquer it,” says a contemporary poet.[815] Next day Count Ferrand
 came to meet his allies, and renewed his league with John.[816] On the
 Saturday--Whitsun Eve--the earls disembarked their troops and advanced
 to attack the French at Dam. The overwhelming numbers of the enemy,
 who were headed by King Philip himself, compelled them to retreat.
 Salisbury, however, not only escaped to his ships, but brought all
 his prizes safe to England;[817] while Philip was so mad with rage
 at the disaster to his fleet that he ordered the remnant of it to be
 burnt.[818] So far as England was concerned, his expedition was at an
 end.
 
 John at once resolved that the fleet and the host which had been
 gathered for the defence of England should be used for an attack upon
 France. His plan was, while strengthening Ferrand’s hands so as to keep
 Philip busy in Flanders, himself to land with an army in Poitou, and
 thus place the French kingdom between two fires. At the end of June
 he reassembled his forces at Porchester, and again despatched William
 of Salisbury to Flanders with further reinforcements and large sums
 of money. The magnates, however, refused to accompany the king over
 sea till he was absolved from excommunication.[819] Their excuse was
 transparently false; his public absolution was indeed committed to
 Archbishop Stephen, and therefore deferred till Stephen’s arrival in
 England; but Pandulf had, in the Pope’s name, declared him reconciled
 to the Church. It could only be from political motives that men who had
 without protest marched with the excommunicate king against Scotland,
 Ireland and Wales, and gathered year after year at his festival
 banquets, now suddenly became more punctilious about a matter of
 ecclesiastical discipline than Innocent III. himself. It was, however,
 no moment for quarrelling with them openly; and their excuse, such as
 it was, soon ceased to exist.
 
 King and legate had been rapidly pushing on the arrangements for the
 return of the exiles;[820] and in June or July Archbishop Stephen
 and four of the bishops landed at Dover.[821] On S. Margaret’s Day,
 Saturday, July 20, they were received by the king at Winchester.[822]
 He seems to have gone forth to meet them on the crest of the hill which
 lies to the east of the city.[823] He threw himself at the primate’s
 feet, bidding him welcome, and with tears imploring his mercy; “and
 the prelates and all the rest, when they saw this, could not refrain
 from weeping.” The procession made its way to the Old Minster and
 entered the chapter-house; the king swore on the Gospels “that he
 would cherish, defend and maintain the holy Church and her ordained
 ministers; that he would restore the good laws of his forefathers,
 especially S. Edward’s, rendering to all men their rights; and that
 before the next Easter he would make full restitution of all property
 which had been taken away in connexion with the Interdict.” This oath
 he seems to have repeated publicly at the door of the church; Stephen
 then formally absolved him, led him into the church, and celebrated
 mass in his presence, accepting his offering and giving him the kiss of
 peace; “and there was great joy among the people.”[824]
 
 Having at last made up his mind to a formal reconciliation with
 both Pope and primate, John showed no signs of a wish to evade any
 part of its terms. During the past three months order after order
 had been issued in his name for carrying into effect the provisions
 of his agreement with Pandulf. The outlawry of the clergy had been
 revoked at once, on May 15, and this revocation was repeated on June
 13.[825] Two laymen--Eustace de Vesci and Robert Fitz-Walter--who
 had gone into exile, not in company with any of the bishops nor for
 their sake, but on independent grounds, in the autumn of 1212, had
 been specially mentioned by name in John’s agreement with the Pope,
 and promised reinstatement in their lands and in the king’s favour.
 Safe-conducts were issued to these two barons on May 27, and orders
 for the restitution of their property on July 17, 19, and 21.[826] For
 the bishops something more than mere restitution was required; they,
 or the Pope and Pandulf for them, claimed indemnification as well;
 and the terms of the indemnity were difficult to decide. John seems
 to have proposed that they should be decided by a kind of general
 inquest; on the day {July 21} after his absolution he bade all the
 sheriffs in England cause a deputation of four men and the reeve from
 each township to be at S. Albans on August 4, “that through them and
 his other ministers he might ascertain the truth concerning the damages
 suffered by the several bishops, and what had been taken from them, and
 how much was due to each.” Whether such an inquisition was actually
 held does not appear; but early in August the justiciar and the bishop
 of Winchester met the primate, the other bishops and the magnates in
 a great council at S. Albans; there, in the king’s name, peace was
 proclaimed to all; the observance of King Henry’s laws and the disuse
 of evil customs were strictly enjoined; and the sheriffs, foresters,
 and other officers of the Crown were warned, “as they valued their
 limbs and their lives,” to commit no more extortions and wrongs, “as
 they had been wont to do.”[827]
 
 John meanwhile had returned to the coast of Dorset, where the host had
 apparently been ordered to reassemble, with the intention of sailing
 for Poitou. In view of his own expected absence from England, he is
 said to have committed the government to the justiciar and the bishop
 of Winchester, bidding them “order all its affairs with the advice of
 the archbishop of Canterbury.”[828] The king’s departure, however,
 now met with a new series of checks. First the knights came to him in
 a body and protested that the months which had elapsed since they
 assembled for defence against the French had consumed all their money,
 so that they could not possibly follow him any farther unless he would
 pay their expenses. This he refused to do.[829] The barons of the north
 were the next recalcitrants; when called upon to accompany him over
 sea, they “with one mind and determination refused, asserting that
 according to the tenure of their lands they were not bound to him in
 this; besides that they were already too much worn out and impoverished
 by expeditions within the realm.”[830] The angry king embarked with
 his household on August 5 or 6, and sailed to Jersey; but finding
 that no one followed him thither he soon came back,[831] in a mighty
 rage, “cursing the day and hour when he had consented to the peace,
 and declaring that he had been deceived, and made a gazing-stock for
 nothing.”[832] His mercenaries and foreign auxiliaries were still a
 formidable host; and with these he set out for the north, “to bring
 back the rebels to their obedience.”[833] He seems to have landed at
 Corfe on August 9; he began his northward march from Winchester on
 the 16th, reached Wallingford on the 25th, and Northampton on the
 28th.[834] On the 25th Archbishop Stephen was in London, presiding over
 a great council in S. Paul’s Cathedral.[835] Thence he hurried away in
 pursuit of the king; he overtook him at Northampton, and remonstrated
 vigorously against John’s plans of vengeance upon the northern barons,
 telling him he would bring contempt upon the oath which he had sworn
 before his absolution if he made war upon any man without a legal
 sentence. John “with a great clamour” declared that he would not put
 off the business of his realm for the archbishop, who had no concern
 with matters of lay jurisdiction; and early next morning he set out,
 “in a furious temper,” for Nottingham. The archbishop followed him,
 and threatened that unless the project were at once given up he would
 excommunicate every man, save the king himself, who should take part
 in any military expedition so long as the interdict continued in force;
 nor could John shake him off till he had appointed a day for the
 accused barons to come and stand their trial in his court.[836]
 
 Characteristically, John behaved as if unconscious of defeat. He
 carried out his progress through the north in peaceable instead
 of warlike guise, and did not return to London till the end of
 September.[837] His arrival there was timed to coincide with that
 of the papal legate who came as the specially appointed minister
 of England’s restoration to the communion of the Church, and whose
 authority would for the time supersede that of the primate. On
 September 27 Cardinal Nicolas of Tusculum landed in England.[838] On
 the 30th he met the king, bishops and barons at a council in London,
 to discuss plans for a pecuniary settlement between the Crown and the
 clergy. John offered the bishops one hundred thousand marks down, with
 security for the payment before next Easter of any damages in excess of
 that sum which might be discovered on further investigation. The legate
 urged the bishops to accept this offer; but they preferred to accept
 nothing till they had prepared their own estimate and could demand the
 sum total at once; and the king readily consented to the delay. Three
 days had been spent in the discussion. On the fourth day, October 3,
 the council reassembled in S. Paul’s. At the foot of the high altar, in
 the sight of clergy and people, the ceremony which John and Pandulf had
 gone through at Ewell was repeated by John and Nicolas. John resigned
 his crown into the legate’s hands, received it back from him, and swore
 fealty to him as the Pope’s representative; and the charter of homage
 and tribute, which had been temporarily sealed with wax and delivered
 to Pandulf, was sealed with gold and finally made over to Nicolas, “for
 the benefit of the Pope and the Roman Church.”[839]
 
 Still the interdict could not be raised till the settlement between
 the Crown and the bishops was completed; and another meeting for this
 purpose was appointed to take place at Reading on November 3. To this
 meeting all the interested parties came, except the king,[840] who was
 at Wallingford, where it seems he had appointed the northern barons
 to appear before his court on All Saints’ Day. The legate was there
 too, and through his mediation the barons were reconciled to the king
 and admitted to the kiss of peace.[841] As John did not show himself
 at Reading, the bishops went to Wallingford in their turn. By that
 time John had moved on to Woodstock; but he seems to have returned
 to Wallingford to meet them for a few hours on November 5,[842] and
 repeated his former proposals. These, however, “seemed little to
 those who had had their castles razed, their houses levelled with the
 ground, and their woods cut down”; so that it was decided to refer the
 matter to the arbitration of four barons. But this arbitration never
 took place. “All the parties concerned in the matter of the interdict”
 came together again at Reading on December 6,[843] and each of the
 injured persons brought forth a schedule of the amount of his losses
 and damages; the legate, however, supported the king in his refusal to
 pay the whole sum at once; and after three days’ deliberation no one
 received anything at all, except the archbishop and the five bishops
 who had been in exile beyond the sea, to whom John on December 12
 ordered the payment of fifteen thousand marks.[844] At last it seems to
 have been agreed that the damages should be investigated by two sets
 of commissioners acting together, one set appointed by the king, the
 other by the primate, and that the sum to be paid by the Crown should
 be fixed--doubtless on the report of these commissioners--by the Pope;
 and this scheme was carried out in the following year.[845]
 
 [Sidenote: 1213–14]
 
 Other questions had arisen in connexion with the settlement between
 Church and king. There were no less than six vacant sees and thirteen
 vacant abbeys,[846] all, of course, in the king’s hands. In July 1213
 John issued orders for filling these vacancies in the manner which
 had been customary under Henry II.; the several chapters were bidden
 to send delegates, by whom an election was to be made in the king’s
 presence, wherever he might chance to be.[847] This arrangement
 implied a tacit understanding that the delegates were to elect a
 candidate designated by the king. The bishops seized their opportunity
 to protest against this practice and claim for the churches their
 canonical right of free election, subject only to the royal assent,
 signified by the grant of the regalia. The legate seems to have been,
 passively at least, on the side of the Crown; but John was anxious to
 avoid any fresh quarrel with the primate, and he therefore allowed
 the elections to be left in abeyance till Nicolas should receive
 instructions about the matter from the Pope. These came at last in a
 somewhat ambiguous form. Innocent bade Nicolas cause the vacant sees
 and abbeys to be filled with men “not only distinguished for their
 good life and learning, but also faithful to the king and useful as
 helpers and advisers for the welfare of the realm, and appointed by
 means of canonical election or postulation, the king’s assent being
 sought thereunto.”[848] It was obviously possible to interpret this
 letter as sanctioning, by implication at least, the claims of the
 Crown; and Nicolas was quite willing thus to interpret it in John’s
 favour. John, however, knew that no such interpretation would ever be
 accepted by Langton; and with Langton he had no mind to quarrel at
 that moment, even though he might have the legate on his own side. He
 did indeed issue on January 2, 1214, orders for the election of a
 bishop to Worcester and an abbot to Eynsham, “according to the customs
 of the realm”;[849] but he seems to have immediately afterwards made
 an arrangement with the archbishop which satisfied the latter for the
 time being. On the 12th John signified to Stephen his acceptance of
 “the form known to us concerning the making of elections, saving our
 right in all things”; he abandoned his claim to have the elections
 held only in his own presence, and delegated the power of giving them
 the royal assent to the ministers who were to have the charge of the
 realm during his absence beyond the sea; and he closed his letter to
 the archbishop with the words: “Be assured that there is no controversy
 between us.”[850] On the 26th he wrote again to Stephen, requesting him
 to confirm the election of the vice-chancellor, Walter de Gray, to the
 see of Worcester, and issued orders for elections to five bishoprics
 and three great abbeys.[851]
 
 [Sidenote: 1213]
 
 What made both John and Stephen anxious for an agreement on this
 point was the king’s approaching departure for the Continent. Soon
 after Stephen’s arrival in England John had made up his mind that
 his expedition to Poitou must be postponed till the spring,[852]
 and in August (1213) he fixed February 2, 1214, as its approximate
 date.[853] Throughout the autumn and winter the fleet was preparing at
 Portsmouth under the superintendence of William de Wrotham, archdeacon
 of Taunton.[854] Arrangements were also in progress for securing
 the tranquillity of the realm during the king’s absence. On June 3
 John--according to his own account at Pandulf’s desire--had made a
 truce with the Welsh to last till August 1.[855] By August 25 he had
 enlisted the aid of the newly arrived primate as a peacemaker between
 the English realm and these troublesome neighbours; the wardens of the
 Marches were authorized to agree to a prolongation of the truce till
 November 1, on the understanding that at its expiration the archbishop
 of Canterbury would negotiate with the Welsh on the king’s behalf.[856]
 Of these negotiations there is no further record; but they seem to have
 resulted in keeping the Welsh in check for some months at least.
 
 In Ireland and in England John had to provide himself with new
 vicegerents. In July Bishop John of Norwich resigned the justiciarship
 of the Irish March to go to Rome on a mission for the king; the
 archbishop of Dublin was appointed justiciar in his stead.[857] On
 October 14 the office of chief justiciar of England was vacated by the
 death of Geoffrey Fitz-Peter,[858] who had held it ever since 1198,
 when he was appointed to it by Richard on the resignation of Hubert
 Walter. It is impossible to regard Geoffrey as a patriot; had he been
 one, he could scarcely have held the reins of government under John for
 fourteen years without coming into open conflict with his master. He
 was, however, a man of much weight in the land by reason of his noble
 birth, his great wealth, and his knowledge of law, and also because he
 was connected by kindred, affinity or friendship with all the great
 baronial houses. Such a man was necessarily somewhat of a check upon
 the self-will of John. The king’s personal feeling towards his minister
 found a characteristic expression when he heard of Geoffrey’s death:
 “When he gets to hell,” laughed John, “he may greet Archbishop Hubert,
 whom he is sure to meet there!”[859] So long as the king was himself
 in England he could do without any justiciar at all; and accordingly
 no successor was appointed to Geoffrey for more than three months.
 John was, however, too cautious to venture upon any glaring abuse of
 his newly acquired freedom of action[860] at a moment when it was
 of the utmost importance for him to conciliate all parties and all
 classes by every means in his power. The one recorded incident of this
 period of John’s personal government, indeed, looks almost like a dim
 foreshadowing of one of the most weighty innovations which were to be
 made by the constitutional reformers of the latter part of the century.
 
 It seems that at the end of October or early in November the tenants
 by knight-service were ordered to meet the king at Oxford on November
 15. On November 7 John sent letters to the sheriffs bidding each one
 of them cause the knights within his shire to appear as previously
 directed, with their arms, the barons also in person but without arms,
 “and”--so ran the writ--“that thou cause to come thither at the same
 time four discreet men of the shire, to speak with us concerning the
 affairs of our realm.”[861] This writ is the earliest known instance
 of an attempt to call into council on “the affairs of the realm”
 representatives of the freemen of the shire, as distinguished from the
 tenants-in-chivalry. Representatives in the strict sense of the word,
 indeed, they were not; the writ says nothing of how they were to be
 chosen, and there can be little doubt that they would be selected by
 the sheriff. Still, the fact remains that--so far as extant evidence
 goes--John Lackland seems to have been the first English statesman who
 proposed to give some place, however subordinate, in the great council
 of the realm to laymen who were neither barons nor knights, but simple
 freemen. His motive is plain; he was seeking to win the support of the
 yeomen as a counterpoise to the hostility of the barons. Unluckily we
 know nothing of the results of his experiment, and cannot even be sure
 that it was actually tried; for though the king was certainly at Oxford
 in that year on November 15 and the two following days,[862] no mention
 occurs, in either chronicle or record, of any council holden there at
 that date.
 
 [Sidenote: 1213–14]
 
 At Christmas John held his court at Windsor, “where he distributed
 robes of state to a multitude of his nobles.”[863] Immediately
 afterwards Count Ferrand of Flanders came over to cement his alliance
 with the English king by performing his homage to him in person,
 at Canterbury, in the second week of January 1214.[864] Raymond of
 Toulouse had been over shortly before; the fortunes of war had gone
 utterly against him, and nothing but prompt succour from John, in
 some shape or other, could enable him to hold out any longer in his
 capital city, the sole refuge now left to him. He is said to have
 gone back, after doing homage to John, with a subsidy of ten thousand
 marks.[865] Early in January the king announced to the primate and
 the bishops that he himself was about to depart over sea, and begged
 that they would lend their support to Bishop Peter of Winchester and
 the other persons in whose charge he intended to leave the kingdom
 during his absence.[866] At the end of the month he put in train
 a scheme for conciliating the eldest son of the late justiciar by
 marrying him to the greatest heiress in England--that same Countess
 Isabel of Gloucester who had once been married to John himself.[867]
 On February 1 John by letters patent appointed Peter des Roches, the
 bishop of Winchester, to the office of justiciar of England, and
 committed his realm to the custody and protection of the Holy Roman
 Church, the Pope and the Legate, leaving Peter as keeper of the peace
 in his stead.[868] Next day he embarked at Portsmouth with his queen,
 his son Richard,[869] his niece Eleanor of Britanny, and a quantity of
 treasure; he spent a few days at Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight, and
 thence sailed to Poitou.[870]
 
 [Sidenote: 1214]
 
 It was evidently of set purpose that the appointment of a new chief
 justiciar had been delayed till the very eve of the king’s departure.
 When it came to the knowledge of the barons, they all grumbled at
 having a foreigner set over them;[871] but they did not know it till
 the expedition had sailed, and their discontent could vent itself only
 in useless words.
 
 Over sea the king’s partisans were ready to welcome him. At La
 Rochelle the barons of Aquitaine came crowding to offer him their
 allegiance.[872] Leaving La Rochelle on February 20, he moved northward
 to Mervant, in the middle of Lower Poitou. Mervant belonged to Geoffrey
 de Lusignan; and the king’s visit to this place may have been connected
 with some negotiations between him and the Lusignan family which
 were certainly begun soon after his landing in Aquitaine. He next
 proceeded southward, to the abbey of La Grâce-Dieu on the border of
 Saintonge; on February 25 he was at Niort.[873] Meanwhile he had opened
 communications with the men of Périgord and the viscounts of Limoges
 and Turenne.[874] On March 6 he was back at La Rochelle, whence he sent
 on the 8th, in letters patent addressed to the “good men” of all the
 chief cities of England, the following account of his expedition: “Know
 ye that we and our faithful followers whom we brought with us to Poitou
 are safe and well, and by God’s grace we have already begun to expedite
 our affairs to the joy and gladness of our friends and the confusion of
 our foes. For on the Sunday before Mid-Lent {March 2} we laid siege to
 the castle of Milécu, which Porteclin de Mausé had fortified against
 us, and on the following Tuesday {March 4} we took it.”[875] Moving
 across Saintonge and up the Charente, he reached Angoulême on the
 13th, stayed there two days, then advanced eastward to Saint-Junien
 and Aixe in the Limousin;[876] at Aixe, on March 22, he granted the
 seneschalship of Limoges to Emeric de Roche, and that of Périgord to
 Geoffrey Teyson.[877] On Palm Sunday, March 23, he left Aixe, and
 thence he struck right across the county of La Marche to Saint-Vaury
 and La Souterraine, on the southern border of Berry; he spent Good
 Friday and Easter at La Souterraine,[878] and there, on Easter Day
 (March 30), he received the homage of the count of Périgord.[879] He
 then re-crossed La Marche and the Limousin--stopping this time for
 two days at Grandmont, where the monks evidently still had a ready
 welcome for the son of their old friend King Henry--back to Limoges and
 Angoulême, Cognac and Saintes; thence, turning southward, he proceeded
 through Périgord as far as La Réole in the county of Agen. On April
 20 he was back at Mausé in Saintonge, and for the next fortnight he
 was never far from either La Rochelle or Niort; but on May 6 he was at
 Saint-Léger in Anjou, and it was there that he spent Ascension Day, May
 8. Two days later he was again at Niort.[880]
 
 The panegyrist of Philip Augustus asserts that John’s sudden dash into
 the lands south of Périgord was prompted by dread of Philip, who,
 “being desirous to meet him” in the field, had hurried to the Poitevin
 border, and was preparing to cut him off from his fleet. The same
 writer, however, owns almost in the same breath that “no one knows,
 ever has known, or ever will know, the way of a serpent, of a ship on
 the deep, of a feather in the wind, or of a deceiver” such as John; and
 that Philip dared neither attempt to follow him nor await his return,
 but hurried back--after burning the rural districts of Poitou--to
 protect his own interests in Flanders.[881] John’s erratic movements
 had probably a double purpose: to baffle Philip, and to ascertain the
 extent of his own resources in the south. Of more real importance than
 these tentative excursions was a negotiation which he had set on foot
 with the house of Lusignan, whose alliance and allegiance he proposed
 to regain by giving the infant Joan, his eldest daughter by Isabel of
 Angoulême, in marriage to young Hugh of La Marche, as compensation
 for the loss of Isabel herself. The first preliminary was a truce
 with the counts of La Marche and Eu; and it was probably this truce
 which enabled John to pass unmolested through La Marche on his way to
 and from La Souterraine. The third Lusignan brother, Geoffrey, seems
 not to have been included in the truce; and when it expired no terms
 of peace had been agreed upon. “We therefore”--so wrote John to his
 representatives in England--“on the Friday next before Pentecost {May
 16} transported ourself and our army to Geoffrey’s castle of Mervant;
 and although many believed it impregnable by assault, yet on Whitsun
 Eve {May 17}, by one assault lasting from daybreak to the hour of
 prime, we took it by force. On Whitsunday {May 18} we laid siege to
 another of Geoffrey’s castles, Vouvant, in which was he himself with
 his two sons; and when we had plied our slings against it continually
 for three days {May 20}, so that its fall was imminent, the count of
 La Marche came to us and caused the said Geoffrey to surrender himself
 to our mercy, with his two sons, his castle, and all that was in it.”
 Another of Geoffrey’s castles, Montcontour, which lay farther east,
 close to the Angevin border, was at the same time besieged by Louis
 of France. The French king seems to have discovered the negotiations
 of the Lusignans with his rival, and to have been so much alarmed at
 the prospect of a reconciliation which would deprive him of his best
 helpers in Aquitaine that he tried to prevent it by offering a son of
 his own as bridegroom for little Joan; but Joan’s father was too wary
 to take the French bait. On learning that Louis was at Montcontour,
 “we,” says John, “at once turned thitherward to meet him; so that
 on Trinity Sunday {May 25} we were at Parthenay, where the count
 of La Marche and the count of Eu came to us with the said Geoffrey
 of Lusignan and did us homage and fealty.