This Hugh declined, but he consented

to accompany John for a few days on his journey north-

ward. They set out at once for Saumur, and stopped at

Fontevraud to visit the tombs of Henry and Richard. When

John knocked at the choir-door for admittance, however, he

was told that the abbess was away, and no visitor might

enter without her leave. He then asked Hugh to communi-

! Magna Vita S. Hugonis, p. 287.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 86; R. Coggeshall, p. 99.

* Mag. Vita S. Hug. l.c.

I 199




I 199

|

|

cate to the sisters, in his name, a promise of benefactions to

their house, and a request for their prayers. “You know,”

said Hugh, “that I detest all falsehood; I will utter no

promises in your name unless I am assured that they will

be fulfilled.” John swore that he would more than fulfil

them ; and the bishop did what he had been asked to do.

As they left the church, John drew forth an amulet which

hung round his neck and showed it to his companion,

saying it had been given to one of his forefathers with a

promise from Heaven that whosoever of his race had it in

his possession should never lose the fulness of his ancestral

dominion. Hugh bade him trust “not in that stone but in

the Chief Corner Stone”; and turning round as they came

out of the porch, over which was sculptured a representation

of the Last Judgement, he led him towards the group on the

left of the Judge, and besought him to take heed of the

perils attending the responsibility of a ruler during his brief

time upon earth. John dragged his monitor across to the

other group, saying, “You should rather show me these,

whose good example I purpose to follow !” During the

three days of his journey in Hugh's company, indeed, his

affectation of piety and humility was so exaggerated that it

seems to have rather quickened than allayed Hugh's distrust

of his good intentions." On Easter Day the mask was

suddenly dropped. Bishop and count spent the festival

(April 18) at Beaufort,” probably as the guests of Richard's

widow, Berengaria. John was said to have never communi-

cated since he had been of an age to please himself in such

matters; and now all Hugh's persuasions failed to bring

him to the Holy Table. He did, however, attend the high

mass on Easter Day, and at the offertory came up to Hugh

—who was officiating—with some money in his hand; but

instead of presenting the coins he stood looking at them

and playing with them till Hugh asked him, “Why do you

stand staring thus P” “I am staring at these gold pieces,

and thinking that a few days ago, if I had had them, I

should have put them not into your hands, but rather into

my own purse; however, take them now.” The indignant

1 Mag. Vita S. Hug. pp. 287-91. * R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 87.




bishop, “blushing vehemently in John's stead,” drew back

and bade him “throw into the bason what he held, and

begone.” John obeyed. Hugh then followed up his rebuke

with a sermon on the characters of a good and of a bad prince,

and the future reward of each. John, liking neither the

matter of the sermon nor its length, thrice attempted to cut

it short by a message that he wanted his dinner; Hugh only

preached the longer and the more pointedly, and took his

leave of John on the following day."

On that day John discovered that he was in a situation

of imminent peril. While he had been travelling from the

Breton border to Chinon and thence back to Beaufort, Philip

had mastered the whole county of Evreux and overrun

Maine as far as Le Mans; and a Breton force, with Constance

and Arthur at its head, had marched straight upon Angers”

and won it without striking a blow. City and castle were

surrendered at once by Thomas of Furnes, a nephew of the

seneschal Robert of Turnham ; * and on Easter Day a great

assembly of barons of Anjou, Touraine and Maine, as well

as of Britanny, gave in their adhesion to Arthur as their

liege lord and Richard's lawful heir.” The forces thus

gathered in the Angevin capital, from which Beaufort was

only fifteen miles distant, must have been more than

sufficient to overwhelm John, whose suite was evidently a

very small one. His only chance was to make for Nor-

mandy with all possible speed. Hurrying away from

Beaufort on Easter Monday, he reached Le Mans the same

night; its citizens received him coldly, its garrison refused

to support him, and it was only by slipping away before

daybreak on Tuesday that he escaped being caught between

two fires. On that very morning the Bretons and their new

allies entered Le Mans in triumph,” and they were soon met

there by the French king, to whom Arthur did homage for

the counties of Anjou, Touraine and Maine."

1 Mag. Vita S. Hug. pp. 291-5.

* Rigord, c. 127.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 99; R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 85, 86.

* R. Howden, pp. 86, 87; date from Chron. S. Albini Andeg. a. I 199.

* Mag. Vita S. Hugon. p. 296.

* Rigord, c. 127; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. IoI.

I 199

April 20


62 JOHN LACKLAND chap.

I 199

Meanwhile, however, John had made his way to Rouen,

and there he was safe. Richard on his death-bed had

declared that the people of Rouen were the most loyal of all

his subjects; they proved their loyalty to his memory by

rallying round the successor whom he had chosen for

himself, and all Normandy followed their example. “By

the election of the nobles and the acclamation of the

citizens,” John was proclaimed duke of the Normans, and

invested with the symbols of his dukedom in the metro-

politan church on Low Sunday, April 25.” The ducal

crown—a circlet of gold, with gold roses round the top—-

was placed on his head by Archbishop Walter, and the new-

made duke swore before the clergy and people, on the holy

Gospels and the relics of saints, that he would maintain in-

violate the rights of the Church, do justice, establish good

laws, and put down evil customs.” The archbishop then

girded him with the sword of justice, and presented him

with the lance which held among the insignia of a Norman

duke the place that belongs to the sceptre among those of a

king. A group of John's familiar friends stood close behind

him, audibly mocking at the solemn rites. He chose the

moment when the lance was put into his hands to turn

round and join in their mockery; and, as he turned, the

lance slipped from his careless grasp and fell to the ground."

In after years it was only natural that this incident

should be recalled as an omen.” The indecent levity which

had caused the mishap was in itself ominous enough. Still,

however, the Marshal and the Norman and English primates

—for Hubert of Canterbury, too, was at Rouen, and fully

in accord with the policy of William and Walter—clave to

their forlorn hope and persevered in their thankless task.

In obedience to John's orders, Hubert and William now

returned to England to assist the justiciar, Geoffrey Fitz-

Peter, in securing the realm for him." John himself turned

* R. Coggeshall, p. 99.

* Ib. ; R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 87; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 166; Mag. Vita

S. Hugon. p. 293; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 92.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 87-88.

* Mag. Vita S. Hugon. p. 293. * /ö. pp. 293, 294.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 86. John d'Erlée, the Marshal's biographer,


southward again to try whether it were possible, now that

he had the strength of Normandy at his back, to win the

Angevin lands before he went over sea. No sooner had

the French and the Bretons withdrawn from Anjou than

it was overrun with fire and sword by Richard's mer-

cenaries, acting under the orders of their captain Mer-

cadier and of Queen Eleanor, who had enlisted them in

John's interests as soon as they had had time to march

up from Châlus to the Angevin border. John despatched a

body of troops to join them, while he proceeded in person

to Le Mans. There he wreaked his vengeance to the full.

City and castle fell into his hands; he razed the castle,

pulled down the city walls, destroyed the houses capable of

defence, and flung the chief citizens into captivity." But the

danger in his rear was still too great to allow of his advance

farther south. To throw the whole forces of Normandy

upon the Angevin lands would have been to leave Normandy

itself open to attack from two sides at once, and expose

himself to have his own retreat cut off by a new junction

between Philip and the Bretons. He could only venture

to open negotiations with the barons of Anjou and of

Aquitaine, endeavour to win them over by fair words and

promises,” and then leave his interests in the south to the

care of his mother. Accompanied only by a few personal

friends,” he went back through Normandy to the sea; on

May 25 he landed at Shoreham ; * on the 26th he reached

London, and on the 27th—Ascension Day—he was crowned

at Westminster.”

asserts (Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 1 1909-16) that he himself had been sent to

England by the Marshal three weeks earlier, to “take seisin” of the land,

castles, towns and royal demesnes for the count of Mortain. Probably he was

really sent to bid the Marshal's own men in England secure for John the castles,

etc., which they held ; and also to act as a medium of communication between

the Marshal and the justiciar.

1 R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 87, 88, where, however, the order of events is

wrong. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 99.

2 Hist, de G. le Mar. v.v. I 1925-40.

* “Cum privatis suis,” R. Coggeshall, p. 99.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 89; Gerv. Cant., vol. ii. p. 92, says Seaford.

* R. Howden and R. Coggeshall, ll.cc.; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 166.

I IQ9


I 199

CHAPTER III

1199–1206

Contempserunt etenim in eo malivoli quique juvenilem aetatem et corporis

parvitatem, et quia prudentia magis quam pugna pacem optinebat ubique,

“Johannem Mollegladium ” eum malivoli detractores et invidi derisores voca-

bant. Sed processu temporis . .

Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. 92, 93 (a. 12oo).

IN Richard's island realm there was never a moment's

question as to who should succeed him on its throne. In

English eyes one successor alone was possible, no matter

how undesirable he might be. The circumstances of the

case, however—the unexpectedness of the vacancy, the heir's

absence from England, his past relations with the govern-

ment and the people there, and the existence of a rival

claimant—presented an opportunity for endeavouring to

make a bargain with him such as it was not often possible

to make with a new sovereign. Accordingly the English

barons as a body, on hearing of Richard's death, assumed an

attitude of independence. All of them set to work to fortify

and revictual their castles; some of them even began to

attack and plunder their neighbours, as if they deemed that

there was to be again “no king in the land”; and all the

efforts of the justiciar, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, failed to restore

order, till he was joined at the end of April by Archbishop

Hubert and William the Marshal. The archbishop excom-

municated the evildoers, and he and the Marshal conjointly

tendered to all the men of the kingdom, “citizens and

1. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 98, and R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 88.

64


burghers, earls, barons, and free tenants,” an oath of liege

homage and fealty to John. The lesser freemen apparently

took it without hesitation, but many of the barons held

back. These reluctant ones—chief among whom were the

earls of Clare, Huntingdon, Chester, Ferrars and Warwick,

Roger de Lacy and William de Mowbray—were summoned

by the primate, the Marshal and the justiciar to a meeting

at Northampton. There they took the oath, but only in

return for a promise given by the three ministers that if they

did so, John “should render to each of them his rights.””

None of these “rights” are specified; but the expression

used by the historian who records the claim distinctly implies

that it was in each case the claim of an individual to some

particular thing to which he considered himself personally

entitled, something, it would seem, which he had been unable

to obtain from the late king, and which he was therefore

anxious to secure beforehand from the new one. In several

cases the grievance seems to have been that of an heir who

had not yet received investiture of a dignity to which he

had become entitled by inheritance some time before.” With

this grievance the Marshal and the justiciar could not fail to

sympathize; for although they had for some years past

enjoyed the estates attached to the earldoms of Striguil (or

Pembroke) and Essex respectively, neither of them had yet

been invested as earl. Justly, therefore, was the promise

which they had made in John's name redeemed first of all

to them when he girded them with the earl's sword and

belt on his coronation day.”

The chroniclers of the time speak of that day's ceremony

in a matter-of-course way which implies that there was

nothing remarkable about it. “John,” says one, “was

peaceably received by the great men of all England, and was

immediately crowned by Archbishop Hubert of Canterbury

at Westminster on Ascension Day, amid a great array of the

citizens.” “ Sixteen prelates besides Hubert, ten earls and

1 “Quod praedictus dux redderet unicuique illorum jus suum,” R. Howden,

vol. iv. p. 88.

* Stubbs, pref. to W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. xxvi., xxvii.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 9o.

* R. Coggeshall, pp. 99, Ioo.

F

II99


II99

“many barons” were present." The coronation oath was

administered to John in almost the same words as it had

been to Richard, and with the same adjuration not to take

it without a full purpose of keeping it, to which John made

the proper reply.” Of the other details of the ceremony

there is no description; only one incident at its outset and

one omission at its close are noted by contemporarylwriters.”

The first was merely a formal protest made by Bishop Philip

of Durham that the coronation ought not to take place in

the absence of his metropolitan, the archbishop of York.”

The second was an intentional and significant omission on

the part of the newly crowned king himself. It was custom-

ary for every Christian sovereign, after the crown had been

placed on his head, to seal the vows which he had just made

by receiving the Holy Communion. John, however, did not

communicate.”

Next day the new king received in person the homage

of the barons." On this side of the sea, only Wales and

Scotland remained to be secured. Of Wales we hear no-

thing at the moment. Scotland had taken the initiative

immediately after Richard's death; King William the Lion

had at once despatched a message to John, offering him his

liege homage and fealty, on condition that Northumberland

and Cumberland should be given back to the Scottish Crown.

The English primate, Marshal and justiciar, knowing the

difficulties with which John was beset on the other side of

* R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 89, 90.

* R. Wendover (ed. Coxe), vol. iii. pp. 139, 140. Cf. Gesta Ric. pp. 81,

82.

* That the famous speech put into the mouth of Archbishop Hubert by

Matthew Paris (Chron. Maj. vol. ii. pp. 454, 455) is not noted by contemporary

writers does not indeed prove that it was never delivered, but does indicate that,

if delivered, it had for contemporary ears no such significance as has been given

to it by some modern writers, or as Matthew himself appears to have attached to

it. Some such address may have been made to the assembly by the archbishop

before the coronation; but if so, it was evidently regarded at the time as a part

of the formalities usual on the occasion, not remarkable enough to be worth

recording. In Matthew's own MS. the passage is a marginal addition; and in

the form in which he gives it, I can only regard it as the first of the many un-

authenticated interpolations into the plain text of Roger of Wendover with which

Matthew has confused for later students the history of the reign of John.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 9o ; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 139.

* Mag. Vita S. Hugon. p. 293.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 140.


the Channel, probably feared that he might be tempted to

purchase William's support at William's own price; they

intercepted the messenger, and sent word to the Scot king,

by his brother Earl David of Huntingdon, that he must

“wait patiently" till John should reach England. John

himself—to whom they apparently reported what they had

done—sent word to William that he would “satisfy him

concerning all his demands" on his arrival, if the Scot king

would keep the peace till then." Immediately after his

coronation John despatched two envoys to summon William

to his court and conduct him safely thither. After they had

started, there came to the English king three envoys from

Scotland with a repetition of William's former message; but

this time a threat was added ; if William's terms were not

accepted “he would regain all that he was entitled to, if he

could.” John answered quietly : “When your lord, my

very dear cousin, shall come to me, I will do to him whatso-

ever is right concerning these things and other requests of

his"; and he bade the bishop of Durham go to meet the

Scot king, “hoping the latter would come according to his

summons.”” He had himself left London on the morrow of

his crowning to go on pilgrimage to S. Albans;* he after-

wards visited Canterbury and S. Edmunds,” and thence went

to Northampton, to keep Whitsuntide (June 6) and wait

for William." He waited in vain; William only sent back

the English envoys, reiterated his demand for the two

counties and his threat of winning them by force, and added

a further demand for an answer within forty days. John

meanwhile had lost patience with him, had given the two

counties in charge to a new sheriff, and started for the south

on his way back to Normandy. The Scot king's messengers

followed him to the sea;" whether they overtook him is not

clear; at any rate nothing came of their mission, and on

1. R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 88, 89. * Ib. p. 91.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 140.

* R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 166.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 91, says “Nottingham,” but R. Diceto, vol. ii. p.

166, says “Northampton,” and Hardy's Itinerary of A. John, a. 1, shows the

king at Northampton on Whit Monday, June 7.

6 R. Howden, l.c

1 199

May 28


Sunday, June 20, John sailed from Shoreham for Dieppe,"

“taking with him a very great host from England.””

Within three days John and Philip met in conference at

Gaillon. They came to no agreement, and John “made up

his mind to resist the French king like a man, and to fight

manfully for the peace of his country.” It is clear that his

preparations were well in train before the meeting took

place. Philip indeed made the first hostile movement by

laying siege to the castle of Gaillon; not only, however,

was he driven away by the troops who had come over with

John,” but horse and foot came flocking to the muster at

Rouen, though it was fixed for June 24, only four days

after John's landing. On that day he made a truce with

Philip to last till August 16,” thus gaining nearly two

months in which to mature his plans and increase his forces.

He spent the greater part of this time in a progress through

eastern Normandy, and, as the sequel showed, in negotiations

with the counts of Flanders and Boulogne. • On August

Io he was again at Rouen.” On the 13th Baldwin of

Flanders came to him there “and became his man.” On

the 16th, when the truce expired, representatives of the two

kings met in conference between Gouleton and Boutavant;

on the 18th Philip and John met in person. Philip was

asked “why he so hated the king of England, who had

never done him any harm P” He answered that John had

occupied Normandy and other lands without his leave,

whereas he ought first to have applied to his overlord for

confirmation of his rights as heir, and done homage to him.

Now, Philip demanded of John the surrender of the whole

Vexin to the Crown of France, and that of Poitou, Anjou,

Touraine, and Maine to himself as overlord, that he might

transfer them to Arthur."

11.99

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 91. R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 166, gives the date as

June 19, but the Itin. a. I shows John at Shoreham on the 20th, which is R.

Howden's date for the crossing. * R. Coggeshall, p. Ioo.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 92. The place called by Gervase “Ballum ” and

“Wallum ” can only be Gaillon, which Roger of Howden calls “Gwallum ” in

vol. iv. p. 106. * R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 92, 93. * Itin. a. I.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 93. See the treaty with Flanders—dateless, but

probably executed on this occasion—in Rot. Chart. p. 31.

7 R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 95.


The Vexin had been a bone of contention between

France and Normandy for nearly forty years, and its cession

had been distinctly promised by Richard to Philip in I 195.

As for the Angevin heritage, John in taking possession of it

without waiting for investiture had only followed the example

of his predecessor. Richard had made pecuniary amends to

Philip for this irregular proceeding, which in feudal law was

punishable—theoretically—by forfeiture. In his demand

that John should resign the three Angevin counties, there-

fore, and in his previous grant of their investiture to Arthur,

Philip did not exceed his legal rights. With regard to

Poitou the case was more complicated. On the one hand,

it is certain that at some time between Richard's death and

the middle of May 12oo Eleanor and John made an agree-

ment in legal form, whereby John granted his mother to

have and to hold all the days of her life, or during her

pleasure, the whole of Poitou with all its appurtenances, she

having first ceded and surrendered it to him “as her right

heir,” received his homage for it, and made over to him the

rights of government throughout the county and the fealty

and services of its vassals." On the other hand, at the end

of June 1 199 Eleanor had met Philip at Tours, and he had

allowed her to do him homage for Poitou,” thus formally

recognizing her as its lawful countess. Whatever be the

precise date of the first-mentioned transaction, therefore, it

seems that Eleanor, and Eleanor alone, was the person

legally answerable for Poitou to the king of France at this

moment.

The English historian of the conference adds that Philip

further made of John “other demands which the king of

England would in no wise grant, nor was it right that he

should grant them.” What these were he does not state;

but it seems that some of the French nobles were of his

opinion as to their character, for when the meeting broke up,

“such of the counts and barons of the realm of France as

had been in alliance with King Richard ” came to John,

* Rot. Chart. pp. 30, 31 (a. r. 1). “Et,” adds John, “non tantum de

praedictis terris nostris volumus quod sit domina, sed etiam de nobis et omnibus

terris et rebus nostris.” * Rigord, c. 129.

II99


7o JOHN LACKLAND CHAP.

offered him their homage, and made offensive and defensive

alliance with him against their own sovereign." In the case

of the count of Boulogne this alliance was embodied in a

written treaty, drawn up on the same day (August 18) at

“the castle on the Rock of Andely.””

In September Philip recommenced hostilities with the

seizure of Conches." John, who had continued hovering

about eastern Normandy until then, at once struck south-

ward; from September 12 to 17 he was at Bourg-le-Roi

in Maine.” This movement of John's apparently drew

Philip southward after him; the next place which the French

king attacked was the Cenomannian fortress of Ballon, held

for John by one of his father's most devoted adherents,

Geoffrey of Brullon. The castle was taken, and Philip pro-

ceeded to raze it. William des Roches, the constable of

Britanny, protested against this as contrary to the agree-

ment between Arthur and the king. Philip retorted that he

should deal with his own conquests as he pleased, without

regard to Arthur." On that very night—it must have been

September 17—William des Roches went to Bourg-le-

Roi,” begged for a private interview with John, and under-

took to make Arthur, Constance, and all Anjou, Maine and

Poitou submit to him “so that all should be good friends

together,” in return for an oath on John's part that he would

“do with them according to his (William's) counsel.”? A

written record of John's promise to abide by the terms which

William and other “lawful knights” of Normandy and

Britanny—whom William was to choose—should arrange

for peace between himself and his “very dear nephew Arthur,”

“for the honour and advantage of us both,” was drawn up

before witnesses on September 18 at Anvers-le-Hamon.