 Pat._ p. 60 b), which clearly implies that the
 eastern half of the “kingdom of Cork” was then in the king’s hands.
 
 [694] He is last mentioned as being in Dublin on August 24, and he was
 at Fishguard on August 26; _Itin._ a. 12.
 
 [695] _Rot. Pat._ pp. 131, 132 b, 151, 181.
 
 [696] _Dict. Nat. Biog._ “Lacy, Hugh de (d. 1242).”
 
 [697] _Hist. de G. le Mar._ vv. 14286–372.
 
 [698] _Foedera_, vol. i. pt. i. p. 108.
 
 [699] See Note I. at end.
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER V
 
 JOHN AND THE POPE
 
 1210–1214
 
   [Rex] prudenter sane sibi et suis providens in hoc facto, licet
   id multis ignominiosum videretur, et enorme servitutis jugum.
   Cum enim res in arto esset, et undique timor vehemens, nulla erat
   via compendiosior imminens evadendi periculum, nec forsitan alia;
   quoniam ex quo se in protectione posuit apostolica, et regna sua
   beati Petri patrimonium fecit, non erat in orbe Romano princeps qui
   in sedis apostolicae injuriam vel illum infestare, vel illa invadere
   praesumeret.
 
               W. COVENTRY, ii. 210.
 
 
 [Sidenote: 1210–10]
 
 During John’s absence in Ireland, England had been disquieted by
 rumours of a threatened Welsh invasion. His ministers, however,
 faced the peril boldly; the justiciar, the treasurer (Bishop Peter
 of Winchester), and the earl of Chester marched into Wales with
 “a great host” and built three castles on Welsh soil,[700] and on
 the king’s return the Welsh “vanished,” as a chronicler says, into
 their mountains, “and the land kept silence before him.”[701] John,
 however, was in no mood, now that England, Scotland and Ireland were
 all at his feet, to be content with mere silence on the part of the
 Welsh princes, and especially of his own son-in-law, Llywelyn, who,
 having secured the hand of the king’s daughter and the mastery over
 the greater part of Wales, was now openly turning against the power
 by whose help he had risen. The case is frankly stated by a Welsh
 chronicler: “Llywelyn, son of Jorwerth, made cruel attacks upon the
 English; and on that account King John became enraged, and formed
 a design of entirely divesting Llywelyn of his dominion.”[702] The
 native rivals whom Llywelyn had forced into submission were always on
 the watch for a chance of flinging off the North-Welsh yoke; and when
 John assembled his host at Chester, seemingly in the third week of May
 1211,[703] he was joined by most of the chieftains of the south.[704]
 At the tidings of his approach, “Llywelyn,” says the same chronicler,
 “moved with his forces into the middle of the country, and his property
 to the mountain of Eryri (Snowdon); and the forces of Mona, with their
 property, in the same manner. Then the king, with his army, came to
 the castle of Dyganwy. And there the army was in so great a want of
 provisions that an egg was sold for a penny halfpenny, and it was a
 delicious feast to them to get horseflesh; and on that account the king
 returned to England, after disgracefully losing many of his men and
 much property.”[705]
 
 [Sidenote: 1211]
 
 Whatever military “disgrace” there may have been was speedily wiped
 out; John had only gone home to collect fresh supplies and larger
 forces.[706] Setting forth again from Whitchurch in July,[707] “the
 king”--again it is a Welsh chronicler who tells the story--“returned
 to Wales, his mind being more cruel and his army larger; and he built
 many[708] castles in Gwynedd. And he proceeded over the river Conway
 towards the mountain of Eryri, and incited some of his troops to burn
 Bangor. And there Robert, bishop of Bangor, was seized in his church,
 and was afterwards ransomed for two hundred hawks.” Llywelyn sent his
 wife to make terms for him with her father, and was received into
 the king’s peace on delivering up to him a large number of hostages,
 paying a heavy indemnity in cattle and horses, “and consigning also
 the midland district to the king for ever. And thereupon all the Welsh
 princes, except Rhys and Owain, the sons of Gruffydd, son of Rhys,
 made peace with the king; and the king returned victoriously, and
 with extreme joy, to England.”[709] Of course the peace was a hollow
 one, like every other peace with the Welsh; but for the moment John’s
 success was complete. “In Ireland, Scotland, and Wales there was no
 man who did not obey the nod of the king of England--a thing which, it
 is well known, had never happened to any of his forefathers; and he
 would have appeared happy indeed, and successful to the utmost of his
 desires, had he not been despoiled of his territories beyond the sea,
 and under the ban of the Church.”[710]
 
 [Sidenote: 1210]
 
 To neither of these drawbacks was John altogether indifferent. He
 was only biding his time to make a great effort for the removal of
 the first; and although the second appeared, as yet, to have made no
 difference to his political position, he was not insensible to the
 dangers which it might involve. He was still playing with both primate
 and Pope. In the spring of 1210 he had made another feint of renewing
 negotiations with Stephen Langton, had sent him a safe-conduct for a
 conference to be held at Dover, and had actually gone thither (May 4),
 ostensibly for the purpose of meeting him. But the safe-conduct was
 irregular in form; and this circumstance, coupled with a warning from
 some English barons, made Stephen refuse to trust himself in John’s
 power.[711] The king vented his wrath by cutting down the woods on
 all the archbishop’s manors.[712] On his return from Ireland he dealt
 a heavy blow at the religious orders. Towards the end of October he
 called together in London the heads of all the religious houses in
 England, and compelled them to give him sums of money, of which the
 total is said to have amounted to one hundred thousand pounds.[713] The
 Cistercians, whom he had spared in the earlier days of the Interdict,
 had to bear the brunt of his exactions now; they “were forced to
 find him chariots with horses and men,”[714] or, as another writer
 explains it, their privileges were quashed, and they had to give the
 king forty thousand pounds;[715] moreover, their abbots were forbidden
 to attend the triennial chapter of the order at Cîteaux, “lest their
 piteous complaints should exasperate the whole world against such an
 oppressor.”[716]
 
 [Sidenote: 1211]
 
 In June or July 1211[717] the cardinal subdeacon Pandulf, who was much
 in the Pope’s confidence, and a Templar named Durand came to England
 “that they might restore peace between the Crown and the clergy.”[718]
 They seem to have been sent at the king’s request. The terms of the
 commission which they had received from the Pope are known from a
 reissue of it two years later. They were to exhort John to make
 satisfaction “according to a form subscribed between ourself” (the
 Pope) “and his envoys.” If he would publicly take an oath of absolute
 obedience to the Pope’s mandates on all matters for which he was under
 excommunication, they were to give him absolution; and when they had
 obtained from him security for the reinstatement of the archbishop of
 Canterbury, they were to withdraw the interdict.[719] John met them
 on his return from Wales, at Northampton, on August 30,[720] and
 received them publicly in a great assembly of the barons. The details
 of the conference rest only upon the authority of two comparatively
 late monastic chronicles; but there is no reason for doubting the
 correctness of the main outlines of their story. The envoys called upon
 John to make satisfaction to the Church, restore the property which
 he had taken from her ministers, and receive Archbishop Stephen, the
 exiled bishops, their kinsfolk and their friends “fairly and in peace.”
 The king answered that they might make him swear to restore everything,
 and he would do whatever else they liked, “but if that fellow Stephen
 sets foot in my land, I will have him hanged.” A discussion followed as
 to the circumstances of Stephen’s election and the respective rights
 of Pope and King in such matters. John ended by offering to receive as
 archbishop any one whom the Pope might choose except Stephen, and to
 give Stephen another see if he would resign all claims upon Canterbury.
 Pandulf scornfully rejected this proposal. At last, in presence of
 the whole council, he pronounced to John’s face the papal sentence
 of excommunication, of which, he said, the publication had only been
 delayed till his own arrival in England and that of his colleagues;
 he absolved all John’s subjects from their allegiance, bade them be
 ready to join the ranks and obey the leader of any host which the Pope
 might send to England, and denounced not only John himself, but also
 all his posterity, as for ever incapacitated for the office of king.
 It is said that on this John bade the sheriffs and foresters who were
 present bring in whatever prisoners they had in their charge, and
 gave orders for the hanging of some and the blinding or mutilation
 of others, to show the papal envoys his own absolute power and his
 ruthlessness in the exercise of it; that among the prisoners was a
 clerk charged with forgery, whom he ordered to be hanged; that Pandulf
 wanted to excommunicate at once any one who should lay hands on this
 man, and went out of the hall to fetch a candle for the purpose,
 but that the king followed him and gave up the accused clerk “to his
 judgement”--which of course meant, to be set at liberty.[721] Whether
 or not the mock tragedy enacted between king and cardinal really ended
 in this strange fashion, the result of the conference was clearly
 the same as that of all previous diplomacy between Innocent III. and
 John: the Pope gained nothing and the king lost nothing. Pandulf and
 Durand went back to Rome accompanied by envoys from John;[722] an order
 was issued for the recall of the exiles, but it seems to have taken
 the form of a writ bidding all bishops and beneficed clergy return
 before next mid-summer, “on pain of losing their property.”[723] The
 excommunicate sovereign kept his Christmas feast at Windsor,[724] and
 found a new triumph awaiting him at the opening of the new year.
 
 [Sidenote: 1212]
 
 King William of Scotland, stricken in years and with no male heir save
 one young son, the child of his old age, was hard pressed by a party in
 his realm who rallied round a certain Cuthred MacWilliam, a descendant
 of the older line of Scottish kings which the house of Malcolm and
 Margaret had ousted from the succession. In despair of overcoming
 these rebels, William turned to England for succour, and early in 1212
 “committed himself, his kingdom and his son to the care” of his English
 overlord.[725] Before Ash Wednesday (February 7) he had formally
 granted to John the right to dispose of young Alexander in marriage,
 “as his liegeman,” within six years from that date.[726] On Mid-Lent
 Sunday, March 4, the boy was knighted by John, “as the king held a
 festival in the Hospital of S. Bridget at Clerkenwell.”[727] Later
 in the year an English army marched to William’s aid. John himself
 probably led his troops as far as Hexham, where he was on June 27,[728]
 and then sent them on to Scotland with instructions which proved
 sufficient to secure the object of their expedition. They scoured the
 country till Cuthred fell into their power; and the struggle of the old
 Scottish royal house against the “modern kings” ended, for a time at
 least, with the hanging of its champion by English hands.[729]
 
 [Sidenote: 1211]
 
 Meanwhile, John had never lost sight of his plans for a renewal of the
 war with France. The first need of course was money. It was probably
 in the hope of finding some additional sources of revenue which could
 be claimed for the Crown that on his return from Ireland he ordered
 an inquiry into all assizes of novel disseisin which had been held
 during his absence, and also into the right of presentation to,
 and actual tenancy of, all ecclesiastical benefices throughout the
 country.[730] An inquest into the services due from the knights and
 other tenants-in-chief in every shire was ordered in the same year or
 early in the next;[731] and an inquest concerning escheated honours and
 the services due from them was set on foot shortly afterwards.[732]
 In 1211 “the king of France seized all the English ships that touched
 his shores, and therefore”--says the Dunstable annalist--“the king
 of England seized many men of the Cinque Ports”;[733] a statement
 which we can only suppose to mean one of two things: either that John
 suspected some of the ships to have been willing prizes, or that he was
 dissatisfied with the way in which his sailors had executed, or failed
 to execute, some order which he had given for retaliation. In either
 case, however, it is clear that he made his displeasure a ground for
 further exactions from the leading men of the southern coast towns.
 
 [Sidenote: 1197–1209]
 
 Of far greater moment than the desultory skirmishes between the
 sailors of England and France was the scheme of European coalition
 against Philip which John had been gradually building up during the
 past ten years. One of the most important elements in his political
 calculations throughout those years was the course of events in
 Germany. The death of the Emperor Henry VI. in September 1197 had
 been followed by a disputed election to the imperial crown, the late
 Emperor’s brother, Philip of Suabia, claiming it for himself against
 the candidate chosen by the majority of the electors, Otto of Saxony,
 a son of Duke Henry the Lion and Maud, daughter of Henry II. of
 England.[734] The Suabian prince was backed by his powerful family
 connexions, including the duke of Austria, son and successor of Richard
 Cœur-de-Lion’s old enemy Leopold. Otto’s youth had been passed in
 exile at the court of his Angevin grandfather, and he was a special
 favourite of his uncle Richard, who granted him first the earldom of
 York and afterwards the county of Poitou, and whose influence with some
 of the princes of the empire had had a share in procuring him their
 votes. It was, therefore, obvious policy for his rival and the king of
 France to make common cause against him and his kinsman of England.
 A treaty of alliance between the two Philips was signed on June 29,
 1198.[735] In 1200 Otto sent his two brothers to demand for him from
 John a renewal of the investiture of York and of Poitou, and also--if
 we may believe Roger of Howden--two-thirds of Richard’s treasure and
 all his jewels, which he said Richard had bequeathed to him. His
 assertion was correct with regard to the jewels, but the other claims
 are so unreasonable that it is difficult to believe that they can have
 had any justification.[736] John, however, had an answer ready for
 all these demands. The envoys did not reach him till after the treaty
 of Gouleton (May 1200) was signed, and by that treaty he was pledged
 to give no help of any kind to Otto without the consent of the French
 king.[737] This excuse, indeed, was only temporary; in June 1201 the
 Pope recognized Otto as lawful emperor-elect;[738] and though John was
 at that very moment renewing his treaty with France, the uncle and
 nephew speedily drew together. Throughout the vicissitudes of the next
 six years John never lost sight of the community of their interests;
 he constantly showed his sense of it by letters and presents, by loans
 and gifts of money, and by grants of trading and other privileges in
 England to the German and Flemish cities which supported Otto,[739]
 as well as by undertaking the custody of at least one prisoner of
 importance who belonged to the party of Otto’s rival.[740] Otto, whose
 fortunes were gradually rising throughout these years, was so fully
 alive to the value of the English alliance that in May 1207 he came
 to London for a personal interview with John. It is said that on this
 occasion Otto promised to conquer the realm of France and make it over
 to his uncle, all except three cities, Paris, Etampes and Orléans,
 which Philip Augustus had once jestingly said he would bestow upon Otto
 himself if ever the latter became emperor. John gave his nephew six
 thousand marks,[741] and received from him the symbolical gift of a
 great golden crown.[742] As yet, indeed, Otto was only emperor-elect,
 and had the conquest of his own realms to complete ere he could
 attempt that of France. But his fortunes were steadily rising; his
 rival, Philip of Suabia, was slain in the following summer;[743] and
 on October 4, 1209, just at the moment of his uncle’s triumph over the
 English Church, he was crowned by the Pope at Rome.[744]
 
 [Sidenote: 1210–1211]
 
 Within a year, however, Pope and Emperor had quarrelled, and Otto was
 excommunicated.[745] This was, of course, an additional bond of union
 between him and John. At the same time, a kinsman of both princes was
 setting the Pope and the French king alike at defiance. Count Raymond
 of Toulouse, the husband of John’s sister Joan, had from the outset
 favoured the heretics who for the last two years had kept southern
 Gaul in turmoil; in 1211 he openly allowed them to concentrate in his
 capital city, and headed their resistance to the forces which Innocent
 and Philip had sent against them under Simon de Montfort. Toulouse
 was besieged, but John and Otto kept their kinsman so well supplied
 with the means of defence and sustenance that the “crusaders” at last
 grew hopeless of taking it and raised the siege. Otto had answered
 the Pope’s excommunication by conquering Tuscia, Apulia and Calabria;
 whereupon Innocent published another sentence, deposing him from his
 imperial office and his German kingdom, and bidding the princes of the
 empire elect a new sovereign in his stead.
 
 [Sidenote: 1211–1212]
 
 John, “with such a comrade,” grew bolder than ever.[746] The common
 interest of the three excommunicate kinsmen obviously lay in crushing
 France, the ally of the Pope; and the moment seemed at hand for
 the fulfilment of John’s highest hopes. John and Raymond in the
 south, John and Otto in the north and east, might hem in Philip
 Augustus completely, if the princes of the border-land of France and
 Germany--Boulogne, Flanders, the Netherlands, Lorraine--could be so
 won over as to insure their co-operation in the plans of the uncle
 and nephew for the conquest and dismemberment of the French kingdom.
 To this end John’s utmost powers of diplomacy had been devoted for
 many years past; and in the case of most of these princes the end
 was now gained. In the autumn of 1211 Reginald of Boulogne, whose
 policy had long been wavering, quarrelled openly with Philip and took
 refuge with his kinsman the count of Bar;[747] in May 1212 he was in
 England, pledging his homage and his service to John. By the middle
 of August the counts of Bar, Limburg, Flanders and Louvain were all
 pledged to John’s side.[748] John himself was meanwhile preparing for
 an expedition to Gascony; on June 15 thirty-nine English towns were
 ordered to furnish contingents of men “ready to cross the sea with the
 king in his service when he should require them.”[749]
 
 [Sidenote: 1212]
 
 A month later, however, the destination of his armament was changed.
 Just as his plans were ripe for an attack upon France, they were
 checked once more by the necessity of guarding his realm against the
 Welsh. Before the close of 1211 Llywelyn--provoked, as he declared,
 by “the many insults done to him by the men of the king”--had
 leagued himself with his former rivals in South Wales and taken
 “all the castles which John had made in Gwynedd, except Dyganwy and
 Rhuddlan.”[750] And this time the league was more likely to hold
 together than was usually the case with alliances formed by the Welsh
 princes either with their neighbours or with each other; for a new hope
 had dawned upon the Welsh people. The tidings of John’s excommunication
 and deposition by the Pope had penetrated into Wales; and in this
 matter the Welsh, although of all Christian nations probably the least
 amenable to ecclesiastical discipline and the least submissive to
 ecclesiastical authority, became full of zeal to do the utmost that in
 them lay towards carrying out the Papal sentence against their overlord
 and conqueror. “They with one consent,” says their own chronicler,
 “rose against the king, and bravely wrested from him the midland
 district which he had previously taken from Llywelyn.”[751] The version
 of the English chroniclers is that the Welsh invaded the English
 border, took some castles and beheaded their garrisons, carried off a
 mass of plunder, and then burned everything and slew every man that
 they could lay their hands on.[752]
 
 It was clear that an end must be made of this Welsh trouble before
 John could venture across the Channel. He changed his plans with his
 usual promptitude. In July the king’s escheators throughout England
 were ordered to see that the escheats in their custody should furnish
 each a certain number of carpenters and other labourers provided with
 proper tools, and with money enough to carry them to Chester. Writs
 were also issued to Alan of Galloway bidding him send a thousand of his
 “best and bravest men,” to William the Marshal, Bishop John of Norwich,
 and others of the king’s liegemen in Ireland, and to the tenants by
 serjeanty throughout England, requiring their personal attendance; the
 place of muster for all alike being Chester, and the appointed date
 Sunday, August 19.[753] On August 16, however, the king sent out from
 Nottingham a notice that he was unable to be at Chester on the day
 fixed, and that the muster would not take place.[754] The orders which
 he issued next day indicate that he was contemplating a diversion by
 sea, part of the fleet being ordered to sail from Chester, coast along
 North Wales, and “do as much harm to the enemy as possible,” while
 another part was to assemble at Bristol.[755] He probably meant to
 await the result of these movements, as well as of some negotiations
 which he was carrying on with the South Welsh chieftains,[756] before
 deciding whether his main advance should be made by way of North or
 South Wales.
 
 The host finally mustered at Nottingham in the second week of
 September.[757] The chivalry of England gathered {Sept. 9–15} round the
 king “in such array and in such numbers,” says a contemporary, “that no
 man of our day remembers the like.”[758] John’s first act on reaching
 the muster-place, “before he tasted food,” was to hang twenty-eight
 of the hostages whom he had taken from the Welsh in the previous
 year.[759] But “suddenly God brought his counsel to nought.”[760] As
 he sat at table there came to him a breathless messenger from the king
 of Scots, followed by one from the Princess Joan of Wales, John’s
 daughter and Llywelyn’s wife. Both messengers brought letters whose
 contents, they said, were weighty and secret. When the two letters
 were read, their purport proved to be almost identical. William and
 Joan alike warned the king that his barons were preparing to act
 upon the papal sentence which absolved them from their allegiance,
 and, if he persisted in leading them to war, either to turn and slay
 him themselves, or deliver him up to death at the hands of his Welsh
 enemies.[761] Such a warning, coming at the same instant from two such
 different quarters, was not to be lightly put aside. It was emphasized
 by the sudden disappearance of two barons, Eustace de Vesci and
 Robert FitzWalter, who at once secretly withdrew from the host.[762]
 John could hardly doubt the significance of their departure at such
 a moment. He dismissed his army and moved by slow stages back to
 London.[763]
 
 The month which had elapsed between John’s order countermanding the
 muster at Chester and his return to Nottingham had been spent by him
 in a progress through the north;[764] and it was probably during this
 time that there came to his ears a prediction concerning him spoken by
 one Peter, variously described as “of Pontefract” or “of Wakefield.”
 This Peter was “a simple countryman,” who lived on bread and water,
 and was counted among the people for a prophet. He foretold that on
 the next Ascension Day John should cease to be king. Whether John was
 to die, or to be driven from the land, or to abdicate, Peter could not
 say; he only knew that it had been revealed to him in a vision that
 after the king had reigned prosperously for fourteen years, neither
 he nor his heirs should rule any more, “but one who is pleasing to
 God.”[765] John, on hearing of this prophecy, laughed it to scorn;
 but when Peter was found to be wandering all over the north country
 publishing his supposed vision wherever he went, some of the king’s
 friends deemed it prudent to take the prophet into custody.[766]
 He was brought before John himself, who asked for more explicit
 information as to his own impending fate. Peter only replied, “Know
 thou of a surety that on the day which I have named, thou shalt be
 king no more; and if I be proved a liar, do with me as thou wilt.”
 “According to thy word, so be it,” answered John; and he sent the man
 to be imprisoned at Corfe.[767] This precaution, however, defeated
 its own end; Peter’s captivity in a royal dungeon gave to him and
 his prophecy a new importance in popular estimation; his words were
 repeated far and wide, and believed “as if they had been spoken by a
 voice from Heaven.”[768] The dread which they are said to have inspired
 in the king himself[769] proves nothing as to whether, or how far, he
 shared the superstitious credulity of his people. Apart from all such
 questions, he had obviously a sufficient reason for alarm in the fact
 that the general acceptance of a political prophecy naturally tends to
 work its fulfilment.
 
 Other influences were working in the same direction. Even without the
 special warnings which he had received at Nottingham, John must have
 been well aware that he had, as Roger of Wendover says, “almost as many
 enemies as he had barons.”[770] The question was only how soon their
 silent hate would break out in open defiance, and whether he could once
 more terrify or beguile them into submission before the smouldering
 embers of their discontent were kindled into a general conflagration
 by Innocent’s anathema and Peter’s prophecy. On reaching London he
 addressed to all those whose fidelity he suspected a new demand for
 hostages, “that he might prove who would and who would not obey his
 orders.” The response showed that he was even yet stronger than he
 himself had dared to believe. From many of these men he had already
 had hostages in his keeping for years; several of them had suffered
 in their family relations a far deeper injury at his hands; yet once
 again, at his bidding, they gave up to him sons, nephews, kinsmen, “as
 many as he would, not daring to resist his commands.”[771] Eustace de
 Vesci and Robert Fitz-Walter alone refused all purgation, and fled,
 the one to Scotland, the other to France; their castles were seized,
 their lands confiscated, and themselves outlawed.[772] With his own
 servants and clerks the king dealt in yet more summary fashion; those
 among them whom he suspected were arrested and cast into prison.[773]
 Fresh humiliations were heaped upon the clergy. The Cistercians are
 said to have been mulcted of twenty-two thousand pounds in punishment
 for the help which they were supposed to have given to the enemies of
 Raymond of Toulouse;[774] and all the English clergy, both regular
 and secular, were forced to set their hands to a deed whereby they
 renounced all pecuniary claims against the king, and declared that
 all the money which he had had from them since his accession was a
 free and voluntary gift.[775] On the other hand, John was taking some
 pains to conciliate the people. He checked the severity of the Forest
 administration. He forbade the extortions practised by his officers on
 merchants and pilgrims. “Moreover, he is said to have showed mercy on
 widows, and done what in him lay to promote peace in temporal affairs.”
 Sternness and conciliation alike did their work. Again “the land kept
 silence”;[776] and it seems that the first sound which broke the
 silence was a declaration of the barons in favour of the king.
 
 Some time between the summer of 1212 and the spring of 1213 two
 remarkable letters were written by John, the one to his chief justiciar
 in Ireland, Bishop John of Norwich, the other to Earl William the
 Marshal.[777] Both letters deal with the same subjects, and they were
 evidently despatched both at once. The king greatly commends the
 bishop’s discretion in the matter of “the oath of fealty lately sworn
 to us by our barons of Ireland, for the greater safety of ourself and
 our realm,” for which, he says, he is sending letters of thanks to
 them all. He expresses the warmest gratitude to William the Marshal,
 “as their spokesman in this matter, and also as the one from whose
 suggestion and sole desire we doubt not this thing took its rise, and
 to whom we are indebted for the ready disposition and devotion of all
 the rest.” He states further that he is sending to the bishop, the
 earl, and the other barons of the March “copies of the letters patent
 which our magnates of England have drawn up for us,” and he requests
 that the barons of Ireland will “set their seals to letters of similar
 tenour, and send them to us.” Lastly, he alludes to some advice which
 the Marshal and the other lay barons in Ireland “have sent to us about
 making peace with the Church,” and desires that they will “provide,
 by the common counsel of our faithful subjects in those parts, a
 form whereby peace may be made sure without injury to our liberties
 and rights,” and transmit it to him. “See you to it,” he adds to the
 justiciar, “that this be done.”[778]
 
 We can hardly doubt that there is some connexion between these letters
 and another yet more remarkable document, whose date must lie between
 Pandulf’s visit in August 1211 and the spring of 1213. This is a
 manifesto addressed “to all faithful Christians” by “the whole of the
 magnates of Ireland,” with William the Marshal and Meiler Fitz-Henry
 at their head, expressing their “grief and astonishment” that the Pope
 should propose to absolve the subjects of the king of England from
 their allegiance, and declaring their approval of John’s political
 conduct and their determination to “live and die with their king.”[779]
 This manifesto may have been drawn up when the barons of the Irish
 March, at the Marshal’s suggestion, renewed their fealty to John; or it
 may have been their answer to John’s request that they would set their
 hands to and transmit to him letters patent similar to those which, he
 says, had been “made for him” by the magnates of England. There is,
 indeed, another possible alternative. On more than one occasion, and
 by more than one chronicler, John is charged with forging letters and
 other like documents. The letter ascribed to the magnates of Ireland
 and the letters--of which nothing is now known--sent to them by John as
 having been issued by the magnates of England may therefore have been
 both alike forgeries. There is, however, nothing to indicate that such
 was the case. If it was not, then it seems that the barons of England,
 who in the autumn of 1212 were believed to be on the verge of rebellion
 or something worse, were yet so weak, as well as so false, that John
 could force from them a collective declaration in writing which,
 whatever its precise import may have been, was evidently a declaration
 in his interest and for his advantage; and that in the same crisis the
 barons of the Irish March, acting under the guidance of the noblest and
 wisest man in their whole order, ranged themselves boldly on the side
 of John against all his enemies. The king, to whom for a moment ruin
 had seemed so near that he himself gave way to despair, was within a
 few months, perhaps even a few weeks, outwardly more than ever supreme.
 
 On the other hand, those same loyal barons in Ireland who seem to
 have so emphatically declared their resolve to stand by the king in
 resistance to the papal sentence of deposition had yet urged upon
 him the importance of procuring a withdrawal of that sentence by
 endeavouring to make peace with the Church. Whether they did, according
 to John’s request, draft a form of proposals to be laid before the
 Pope, there is nothing to show; but it is certain that in November John
 despatched to Rome four envoys charged to offer his acceptance of the
 terms which Pandulf and Durand had proposed fifteen months before.[780]
 
 [Sidenote: 1212–13]
 
 John, in fact, knew well how unsubstantial his apparent supremacy was,
 and how hollow were the foundations on which it rested. He knew that if
 he wished to prevent the fulfilment of Peter’s prophecy, he must now
 disarm once for all, and secure permanently for his own interest, some
 one at least of the various enemies, or groups of enemies, against whom
 he had been struggling for six years at such overwhelming odds. By the
 end of 1212 the signs of the times were beginning to point out who this
 one must be; by the early spring of 1213 there could no longer be any
 doubt on the point. The fortunes of war in Germany and in southern Gaul
 had shattered John’s hopes of crushing Innocent and Philip Augustus
 both at once. In Aquitaine Simon de Montfort and his “crusaders” were
 gradually winning their way against the Albigenses, and Raymond of
 Toulouse was practically ruined. In Germany the young King Frederic
 of Sicily had at the Pope’s instigation been elected to the empire
 in Otto’s stead. Otto sought to regain his footing in the country by
 marrying the daughter of his former rival, {August} Duke Philip of
 Suabia; but the bride died a few days after her marriage;[781] and in
 November (1212) the political league which Innocent was building up
 against Otto and John was completed by a treaty of alliance between
 Frederic and Philip Augustus.[782] Triumphant everywhere on the
 continent, Innocent resolved to make an end of matters with John. In
 the winter of 1212 Stephen Langton and the bishops of Ely and London
 carried to Rome in person their complaints against their sovereign,
 and their entreaties that such a state of things should be suffered to
 continue no longer. In January 1213 they returned to the French court
 accompanied by Pandulf, and bringing with them a letter from the Pope
 to the French king.[783] Innocent in this letter solemnly laid upon
 Philip, for his soul’s health, the task of expelling the English king
 from his realm, and bade him assume in John’s stead the sovereignty
 of England for himself and his heirs for ever.[784] It is said that
 the Pope wrote at the same time to the other sovereigns and princes
 of Europe, bidding them join under Philip’s leadership in a sort of
 crusade against John, and granting to all who should take part in this
 expedition the same privileges, temporal and spiritual, which were
 conferred on pilgrims to the Holy Sepulchre.[785]
 
 These letters and the papal decree for John’s deposition were publicly
 read to the French bishops, clergy and people in a council assembled
 for that purpose at Soissons on the Monday in Holy Week, April 8.[786]
 It was no new idea that the papal mandate suggested to Philip Augustus.
 For a whole year at least he had been contemplating the conquest of
 England and the establishment of his eldest son, Louis, upon its
 throne; in April 1212 Louis had already arranged the terms on which
 he would receive the homage of the English barons and the political
 relation in which he was to stand towards his father after his own
 coronation in England.[787] To Philip and Louis the Pope’s commission
 was merely the signal that their longed-for hour had come. “Then the
 king of the French, hearing and receiving the thing which he had long
 desired, girded himself up for the fight,” and bade all his men, on
 pain of “culvertage,” be ready to meet him at Rouen on April 21, the
 first Sunday after Easter;[788] and ships, victuals, arms and men were
 rapidly gathered together in answer to his call.[789]
 
 [Sidenote: 1213]
 
 Still more prompt and vigorous were John’s preparations for defence.
 He seems to have begun by ordering that all English ships should
 return to the ports to which they severally belonged not later than
 the first Sunday in Lent, March 3. On that day he despatched writs to
 the bailiffs of the seaport towns, bidding them make out a list of the
 vessels which they found in their respective ports capable of carrying
 six horses or more, and direct the captains and owners of all such
 vessels, in his name, to bring them to Portsmouth at Mid-Lent (March
 21), “well manned with good and brave mariners, well armed, who shall
 go on our service at our expense.”[790] He next bade the sheriffs
 summon all earls, barons, knights, freemen and sergeants, whosoever
 they were and of whomsoever they held, who ought to have arms or could
 get them, and who had done him homage and fealty, to the intent that,
 “as they love us and themselves and all that is theirs, they be at
 Dover at the close of Easter next, well prepared with horses and arms
 and with all their might to defend our head, and their own heads, and
 the land of England. And let no man who can bear arms stay behind, on
 pain of culvertage and perpetual servitude; and let each man follow
 his own lord; and let those who have no land and can carry arms come
 thither to take our pay.” Each sheriff was to see that all sales of
 victuals and all markets within his sheriffdom “followed the host,”
 and that none were held elsewhere within his jurisdiction. He himself
 was to come to the muster “in force, with horses and arms,” and to
 bring his roll, whereby the king might be certified who had obeyed his
 summons and who had stayed behind.[791]
 
 England responded as quickly and readily as France to the call of
 her king; the threat of “culvertage” seems to have acted upon the
 Englishmen of John’s day as the threat of being accounted “nithing” had
 acted upon their forefathers in the days of William Rufus and Henry I.;
 they came together at the appointed places--Dover, Faversham and
 Ipswich--in such crowds that in a few days, despite John’s precautions,
 the supply of food became insufficient, and the marshals of the host
 found it needful to dismiss the greater part of the light-armed troops,
 retaining only the knights, sergeants and better-armed freemen, with
 the cross-bowmen and archers. The picked body thus left, which was
 finally reviewed by the king on Barham Down, near Canterbury, {May 4–6}
 was still so numerous that a patriotic chronicler declares, “If they
 had been all of one heart and mind for king and country, there was
 no prince under heaven against whom they could not have defended the
 realm of England.”[792] How many of the barons in the host had come to
 it with the intention of going over to Philip as soon as he landed,
 it is useless to inquire; perhaps the only one whom we can with full
 confidence acquit of any such suspicion is William the Marshal.[793]
 The king’s plan, however, was that his fleet should intercept the
 invaders and “drown them in the sea before ever they could set foot on
 the land”; and as his ships were more numerous than Philip’s, the plan
 had a good chance of success.[794]
 
 But the first check to Philip’s enterprise was to come from another
 quarter. Even if we could perceive no outward indication of the Pope’s
 motives in giving his commission to the French king, we should still
 find it hard to believe that so far-seeing a statesman as Innocent III.
 seriously contemplated with approval the prospect of a French conquest
 of England. At the moment, indeed, France was the most efficient
 political instrument of the Papacy; but it could scarcely be a part of
 the papal policy to give her such an overwhelming predominance as she
 would have acquired by the annexation of England to her crown. England,
 no less than France, had her place in the European political system, of
 which Innocent looked upon himself as the director and the guardian;
 and the extinction of England as an independent state would have
 destroyed the balance of powers which it was a special function of the
 Papacy to maintain with the utmost care, and whose preservation was of
 great importance to Innocent for carrying into effect his own political
 designs.