- - - Johan sanz Terre,

Por qui ill ot tant noise e guere.

Estoire de la Guerre Sainte, vv. IoI, Io2.

THE fifth son, the eighth and last child, of Henry II. of

England and Eleanor of Aquitaine was born at Oxford, in

the “King's manor”—that is, the palace of Beaumont—

on Christmas Eve 1 1674. Of their six other surviving

children, the three younger were daughters; the last of

these, Joanna, was then two years old. The eldest living

son, Henry, was nearly thirteen ; Richard was ten, and

Geoffrey nine. The boy Henry had, when an infant, been

acknowledged by the barons of England as heir to the

crown,” and in I 16o had done homage to Louis of France

for the duchy of Normandy.” In 1162 preparations had

been made for his crowning in England, and he had again

received the homage of the barons,” to which that of the

Welsh princes and the Scot king was added in 1163.”

Eleanor's duchy of Aquitaine had been destined for her

second surviving son, Richard, as early as I 159, when he

1 I.e. Henry II.

* The place comes from the prose addition to Robert of Gloucester, ed.

Hearne, vol. ii. p. 484; on the date see Stubbs, pref, to W. Coventry, vol. ii.

P. *'. Torigni, a. 1155; Gerv. of Canterbury, vol. i. p. 162.

* R. Torigni, a. 1160.

* R. Diceto, vol. i. p. 306. * Ib. p. 311.

* R. Torigni, a. 1159.

1167

~

º

º


1167

I 169

was not yet two years old. In the summer of 1166 the

king had secured Britanny for Geoffrey by betrothing him

to its heiress." The whole Angevin dominions, with one

exception, were thus, in design at least, partitioned among

John's brothers before John himself was born. The excep-

tion was, indeed, an important one ; in the contemporary

accounts of Henry's plans during this period for the distribu-

tion of his territories, there is no mention of Anjou and its

dependency Touraine. The reason, however, is obvious.

Anjou was the cradle of his race, the very heart and centre

of his dominion, the one portion of it which he had inherited

from his forefathers in unbroken male descent, by a right

which had been always undisputed and indisputable. The

destiny of Anjou was therefore as yet unspecified, not because

Henry was reserving it for a possible younger son, but

because its devolution to his eldest son, as head of the

Angevin house after him, was in his mind a matter of course.

It was in fact Henry himself who gave to his new-born

child the name which has clung to him ever since—“Johans

Sanz Terre,” John Lackland.”

Two years later the scheme of partition was fully

developed, and now Anjou was explicitly included in it.

At Epiphany I 169 Louis of France granted to the younger

Henry the investiture of Anjou and Maine, on the under-

standing that the boy was to hold these fiefs, as well as

Normandy, in his own person, directly of the French crown.

Richard was invested, on the same terms, with the county

of Poitou and the duchy of Aquitaine. Britanny was

granted to young Henry, to be holden by his brother

Geoffrey of him as mesne lord, under the king of France as

1. R. Torigni, a. 1166.

* “Quartum natu minimum Johannem Sine Terra agnominans,” W. New-

burgh, l. ii. c. 18. Cf. W. Armor. Philippis, l. vi. vv. 591, 592, who says,

addressing John—

“Antea quam fato fieres ludente monarcha,

Patris ab ore tui Sine-Terra momen habebas.”

The name seems to have been commonly used as if it were a part of John's

proper designation: “Johannes . . . quem vocant Sine Terra, quamvis multas

et latas habet possessiones et multos comitatus,” says R. Torigni, a. 1185. So

the writer of the Estoire de la Guerre Sainte : “Johan sanz Terre ot nom li

mendres,” v. 179; “Johan sanz Terre, Por qui il ot tant noise e guere,” vv. IoI, -

IO2.


overlord." The one fragment of the continental dominions

of the Angevin house which the king of England formally

reserved to himself was Touraine; his homage for it was

due to a prince of inferior rank, the count of Blois, and his

paternal pride chose rather to perform that homage himself

than to suffer it to be performed by any of his sons.”

All these arrangements were as yet merely prospective.

Henry had no intention of abdicating, nor of depriving

Eleanor of her rights as duchess of Aquitaine and countess

of Poitou, nor even of dispossessing the reigning duke of

Britanny. His purpose was simply to insure that, were he

himself unexpectedly to become disabled or die, there should

be no fair pretext for fighting over his inheritance or

defrauding any of his sons of their shares, but that they

should be bound to each other, and their overlord Louis

bound to each and all of them, by such legal ties as none of

the parties could lightly venture to set at defiance. In June

I 17o the scheme was completed by the coronation of the

younger Henry at Westminster. Two months later the elder

king fell sick at La Motte-de-Ger, near Domfront. Believing

his end to be at hand, he confirmed the partition of January

I 169, and solemnly bequeathed the one son who had no

share in it—John—to the guardianship of his eldest brother,

“the young king,” “that he might advance him and main-

tain him.”* One contemporary historian adds: “And he

(the king) gave to his youngest son John the county of

Mortain.” “ The meaning of this probably is that Henry

1169

1. Cf. R. Torigni, a. 1169; Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 208, and Robertson's

Materials for Hist. of Becket, vol. vi. pp. 506, 507. According to the writer of

this last account, young Henry's homage to Louis was only for Anjou and Maine,

and he adds: “In hac autem honorum distributione Franci regno suo arbitrantur

plurimum esse prospectum; eo quidem magis quod cum acerbiori dolore meminerant

Henricum filium regis Angliae regi Francorum pro omnibus hominium fecisse,

quando inter ipsum et filiam regis Francorum sponsalia contracta sunt.” But

R. Torigni's account of young Henry's homage to Louis in 1160, when com-

pared with his account of the settlement in 1169, seems distinctly to imply that

the former was for Normandy alone.

* Robertson, Materials, vol. vi. p. 507.

* “Tradidit ei [i.e. Henrico] Johannem fratrem suum minimum ad promo-

vendum et manutenendum,” Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 7. The charge cannot have

been given personally, for though John may have been with his father, the young

king was in England.

* R. Howden, vol. ii. p. 6.

I 17o


1170 expressed a wish, or made a suggestion, that his successor

should provide for John by investing him with Mortain."

From the days of the Conqueror downwards, this Norman

county had always been held by some junior member of the

Norman ducal house. Henry I. had granted it to his

favourite nephew, Stephen ; it had passed to Stephen's son

William, and afterwards to his daughter Mary; in 1168,

Mary's husband, Count Matthew of Boulogne, had ceded it

to Henry II., on condition that a heavy sum charged upon

its revenues should be paid annually to his two daughters.”

Its actual value, therefore, was now very small ; and Henry

on his recovery seems to have abandoned, for the time at

least, his project of bestowing it on John. A year later his

diplomacy had wrought out a scheme for providing John

with a far more splendid, as well as more valuable, endow-

ment than Mortain, by betrothing him to the presumptive

heiress of Maurienne.

1171 A proposal for this marriage was made by Count

Humbert of Maurienne and accepted by Henry in 1171.”

Humbert was then a widower for the third time, and had

only two daughters. The marriage contract, which was

1172 signed at the close of 1 172, provided that if he should yet

have a son, that son should inherit scarcely anything but the

little county of Maurienne itself, which was only a small and

comparatively unimportant part of Humbert's dominions,

stretching as they did along both sides of the Alps and

including all the passes between Gaul, Germany and Italy.

Except Maurienne, and a very trifling portion of land

reserved as a dowry for his younger daughter, all Humbert's

territories—Rossillon-en-Bugey, the county of Belley, the

valley of Novalesia, Chambéry and its dependencies, Aix,

Aspremont, Rochetta, Mont-Major, and La Chambre on the

western side of the Alps; and on their eastern side, Turin,

Cavaur, Colegno, with the homage and service of the count

of Canavesia, and that which the viscount of Aosta owed for

1 See Bishop Stubbs's notes to R. Howden, vol. ii. p. 6, and vol. iii. p. xxiv,

not; R. Torigni, a. 1168; Stapleton, Mag. Rot. Scacc. Morm. vol. i. introd-

pp. lxiii, cxxiii.

* R. Torigni, a. 1171. * Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 35.


Châtillon, and also Humbert's claims on the county of

Grenoble—were devised absolutely and unconditionally to

John and his bride, and were, if Henry so willed, to be

secured to them immediately by the homage of all Humbert's

subjects in those regions to the little bridegroom ; while if

Humbert should die without a son, Maurienne itself was to

be added to John's inheritance. The price stipulated for all

this was five thousand marks, of which one thousand were

paid over at once by Henry to Humbert." It was not till

the infant bride had been actually delivered over to her

intended father-in-law, who was to bring her up in company

with her betrothed till both were old enough to be married,

that Humbert asked what was to be John's share in the

heritage of the Angevin house. Henry, seemingly on the

spur of the moment, proposed to give the boy three castles

with the lands appertaining to them—Chinon, Loudun, and

Mirebeau.” Chinon was in Touraine; but Loudun and

Mirebeau were in Anjou. The project was defeated by

young Henry's refusal to allow any part of his county to be

settled upon his little brother, and it thus gave the immediate

occasion, though it was certainly not the real cause, for his

revolt.8

When that revolt was subdued, the political relations

between King Henry and his elder sons were settled upon

a new footing. The terms of this new settlement, while

confirming the arrangements made at Montmirail for the

devolution of Henry's territories after his death, left no room

for any doubt of his intention to keep them all, for the

present at least, in his own hands. He covenanted to give

to his eldest son, so long as he remained dutiful, two castles

in Normandy and a yearly revenue of fifteen thousand

pounds Angevin ; to Richard, two castles in Poitou, and half

the revenues of that county; to Geoffrey, half the dowry of

Constance till they should be married, and the whole of it

after that event. Richard and Geoffrey had to do homage to

their father “for what he granted and gave them,” but young

Henry was excused from doing the like in consideration

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 35-39. ' * Ib. p. 41.

* Cf. ib. p. 41, and Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 242.

1172

II73

II74

Oct.


of his regal dignity. For John there was now made a

carefully detailed provision; he was to receive an income of

a thousand pounds from the royal demesnes in England,

any escheats which the king might choose to give him, the

castle and county of Nottingham, the castle and lordship of

Marlborough ; two castles and a revenue of one thousand

pounds Angevin in Normandy, and from the Angevin lands

the same amount in money, with one castle in Anjou, one in

Touraine, and one in Maine; and this settlement young

Henry was made to promise that he would keep “firmly and

inviolate.” "

The scheme looks almost as if planned purposely to give

John a foothold in every part of his eldest brother's future

dominions—a strip, so to say, in every one of young Henry's

fields. There was indeed no thought as yet of putting the

boy into possession, of investing him with the county of

Nottingham, or making him do homage either to his brother

or to his father. The clause about escheats, however, soon

furnished an opportunity for adding to John's portion. In

I 175 the great estates of Earl Reginald of Cornwall reverted

to the Crown at his death, and Henry set them aside for

John.” Henry's plans for his little “Lackland” were in fact

completely changed. The project of setting him up as

“marquis in Italy” was abandoned; Alice of Maurienne

was dead,” her father had married again, and neither he nor

Henry seems ever to have thought of insisting upon the

fulfilment of the clause in her marriage-contract which

provided that in case of her premature death her sister

should take her place as John's bride. The settlement of

October 1 174 seems to indicate that Henry now saw his

best hope of providing for John in his insular dominions,

rather than anywhere on the continent. In 1176 there was

added to John's prospect of the earldoms of Nottingham and

Cornwall that of a third English earldom and a yet wider

lordship in the west. Earl William of Gloucester, the son

I 174

I 175

1176

* Cf. Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 77-79; R. Howden, vol. ii. pp. 67-69, and

Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 30.

* R. Torigni, a. 1175.

* Art de Vérifter les Dates, vol. xvii. p. 165.




and successor of Earl Robert and Mabel of Glamorgan, had

been implicated in the recent rebellion. His three surviving

children were all daughters, two of them already married.

He bought his peace with the king by making John heir to

all his lands, Henry in return promising that John should

marry William's youngest daughter, or, if the needful dis-

pensation could not be obtained," he would bestow her on

another husband “with the utmost honour”; while a yearly

sum of one hundred pounds was to be paid by the Crown to

each of her sisters, as compensation for the loss of their shares

of the family heritage. If William should yet have another

son, that son and John were to divide the lands of the

earldom of Gloucester between them.”

Where John himself had been from his birth until near

the completion of his fifth year, there is nothing to show.

He seems to have been with his father at the time of the

marriage-treaty with Maurienne, and throughout the sub-

sequent revolt; “John alone, who was a little boy, remained

with his father,” says Gervase of Canterbury, when speaking

of the defection of Henry's elder sons in 1173.” He was

apparently in England when the arrangement with Earl

William of Gloucester was made, September 28, I 176;

and he was certainly with the king at Nottingham at

Christmas in that year,” and also at Oxford in May 1177,

when Henry bestowed on him the titular sovereignty of the

English dominions in Ireland, and made the Norman-Welsh

barons to whom he had granted fiefs in that country do

homage for those fiefs to John as well as to himself." A

slight indication of the boy's increasing importance may

be found in two entries on this year's Pipe Roll; the ex-

penditure accounted for by the fermor of Peterborough abbey

includes a corrody for “the king's son John,” and fifty-two

pounds spent in buying two palfreys “for the use of the

1 John and Isabel of Gloucester were cousins in the fourth degree according

to the canon law; i.e. they were what is now commonly called second cousins,

being both great-grandchildren of Henry I.

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 124, 125; R. Diceto, vol. i. p. 415, giving the date,

September 28, 1176.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 243. º

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 131. * Ib. pp. 161-5.

1176

1177


1177

I 178

I 182

I 183

same John.” In August the king returned to Normandy;

John followed him, travelling under the care of his half-

brother Geoffrey, the bishop-elect of Lincoln; * at Mid-Lent,

March 19, 1178, he was present with his father and eldest

brother at the consecration of the abbey church of Bec; *

and at Christmas I 178 Henry and John were together at

Winchester.” During the next four years no mention occurs

of John, save that at some time between Michaelmas I 178

and Michaelmas I 179 twenty shillings were spent on horses

for him “in England and Normandy” by one William

Franceis, who seems to have been a groom appointed by the

king to attend him."

John's earliest known appearance as witness to a charter

of his father's seems to date from the early part of the year

I 182 ; his style is simply “John, the king's son.”" This

charter was given at Arundel. When Henry went over sea,

in March, he left John in England under the guardianship

of the justiciar, Ranulf Glanville." Fifteen months later, the

king's arrangements for the disposal of the Angevin succession

were all upset by the death of his eldest son, June 1 1, 1 183.

Almost heart-broken as the father was, one consolation

immediately suggested itself; now at last he might secure to

his favourite child some provision at once loftier and more

independent than any number of Norman counties or English

earldoms, and more substantial than his titular sovereignty

in Ireland. In September Henry “sent to England for his

youngest son, John, and his master Ranulf de Glanville”;

when they had joined him in Normandy he sent for Richard,

and bade him cede the duchy of Aquitaine to John and

receive the boy's homage for it.” This command shows

clearly what Henry's present intentions were. Richard was.

to take the place proper to the eldest son, as heir to the

whole Angevin dominions; when he should enter upon

* Eyton, Itin. of Henry II. p. 210, from Pipe Roll 1177.

* Ib. p. 222, from Pipe Roll 1178.

* R. Torigni, a. 1178. * Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 221.

* Eyton, Itin. Hen. II. p. 226, from Pipe Roll 1179.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 40. For date see Eyton, p. 246.

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 304, 305.

* Zö. pp. 3O4, 305, 307, 308.


his inheritance, his brothers were to hold the two great under-

fiefs, Britanny and Aquitaine, under him, just as he and

Geoffrey had been destined to hold them under the younger

Henry; and this arrangement for the future was to be made

binding by the immediate homage of his brothers to him,

although for the present all three sons were to remain in

subjection to their father. The scheme was reasonable and

just ; but in Richard's eyes it had a fatal defect. For the

last eight years he had been actual ruler of Aquitaine, as

Geoffrey had been actual ruler of Britanny. From 1 175

Henry had given his second and third sons a free hand and

left them to govern their respective duchies for themselves.

Geoffrey's hold upon Britanny had been secured in 1181 by

his marriage with Constance; Richard had secured his own

hold upon Aquitaine by eight years of hard fighting with its

rebellious barons, and was now, in truth, duke by the right

of the sword. But young Henry, the crowned king, had

throughout these years been in England little more than a

cipher, held in check by the authority of his father when

present, and by that of the justiciars in his father's absence;

while in Normandy and the Angevin lands he had had no

practical authority at all. Richard had no mind to give up

substance for shadow. To be de facto duke of Aquitaine was

far better than to be merely titular duke of Normandy and

count of Anjou ; for the title of king, he knew, Henry would

never again grant to any one during his own lifetime.

Richard's answer therefore was that, so long as he lived, he

and he alone would rule Aquitaine. In June 1 184 the

king went back to England,” leaving John in Normandy.

John was now in his seventeenth year, and Henry is said to

have given him permission to “lead an army into Richard's

territories and win them for himself by force.”* Whether

he also furnished him with an “army” for that purpose, or

how John was expected to find one for himself, is not stated ;

possibly the permission was nothing more than a hastily

uttered word which the speaker never meant to be taken

seriously. In any case, however, Henry's departure over sea

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 308. * R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 21.

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 311. -

I 183

1184


1184

left John to his own devices, and to the influence of his next

brother, Geoffrey of Britanny.

Two or three years later, Gerald of Wales sketched the

portraits of Geoffrey and John both at once, in a manner

highly suggestive of the close relations which the two

brothers formed at this time, and of the points of likeness

which drew them together. From that picture we can see

what was the character of the influence under which John

now fell, and what response it was likely to find in the char-

acter of John himself. Geoffrey was now a man of twenty-

six years, a knight of approved valour, reputed scarcely

inferior in this respect to either of his elder brothers, while

he surpassed them both in eloquence of speech and subtlety

of brain. “He was not easy to deceive, and would indeed

have been one of the wisest of men, had he not been so

ready to deceive others. He was a compound of two different

natures, Ulysses and Achilles in one. In his inmost soul

there was more of bitterness than of sweetness; but outwardly

he was always ready with an abundance of words smoother

than oil; with his bland and persuasive eloquence he could

unbind the closest ties of confederation; with his tongue he

had power to mar the peace of two kingdoms. He was a

hypocrite, never to be trusted, and with a marvellous talent

for feigning or counterfeiting all things.”"

There was nine years' difference in age between Geoffrey

and John ; but already a clear-sighted onlooker could see

that the two brothers were cast in the same mould, morally

as well as physically. Both were short in stature—shorter .

than their father, and far below the height of young Henry

or of Richard; they were well built, but on a small scale.

The likeness between them went deeper than that of outward

form. As Gerald expresses it, “while one was corn in the blade,

the other was corn in the ear”; but the blade developed fast.

Before John was twenty, Gerald, though evidently striving hard

to make the best of him, was driven to confess that, “caught

in the toils and snared by the temptations of unstable and

dissolute youth, he was as wax to receive impressions of evil,

but hardened against those who would have warned him of

1 Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 200.


its danger; compliant to the fancy of the moment; making

no resistance to the impulses of nature; more given to

luxurious ease than to warlike exercises, to enjoyment than

to endurance, to vanity than to virtue.”" As soon as the

king was out of Normandy, Geoffrey and John joined hands;

they collected “a great host,” with which they marched,

burning and plundering, into Poitou. Richard retaliated by

harrying Britanny, till Henry, on learning what was going

on, summoned all three brothers to England. They obeyed

the summons,” and in December a “final concord ” between

them was drawn up and sealed at Westminster.” Whatever

were its terms, they evidently did not include any cession of

territory by either of the elder brothers to the youngest.

Geoffrey was at once sent back to Normandy “to take care

of it with its other guardians”;4 and immediately after

Christmas Richard obtained leave to return to Poitou.” The

king's project of transferring Aquitaine to John had been

merely a passing fancy. Of the scheme for establishing him

in Ireland Henry had never lost sight; and this scheme he

now determined to carry into effect.

Before he could do so, however, a yet loftier destiny

was proposed to him for his favourite son. At the end of

January 1 185 Heraclius, the patriarch of Jerusalem, came

to England to implore Henry's aid for the perishing realm

of Palestine. King Baldwin IV. was dying; after him

there was but one male heir left of the blood of King Fulk

of Anjou and Queen Melisenda, and that one was a little

child. From the story as told by Gerald it seems plain

that Heraclius aimed at something more than merely per-

suading Henry to take the command of a crusade; his

project was nothing less than a transfer of the succession

from the younger to the elder Angevin line—from the

infant son of Fulk's grand-daughter to a son of Fulk's

grandson, Henry. When the king of England, after taking

counsel with his “faithful men,” declared that he could not

in person undertake the deliverance of the Holy Land from

I 184

1 Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 199, 200. * Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 319.

* R. Howden, vol. ii. p. 288. * Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 320, 32 I.

* Ib. p. 334.

1185


its enemies, Heraclius still persisted in his other request; he

implored Henry to send at least one of his sons—if even it

were only John—“that from this scion of the Angevin

house the seed royal might be raised up and spring into

new life.” The king, however, would not listen. John, it

is said, was inclined to embrace the patriarch's sugges-

tion, and threw himself at his father's feet to beg his

consent, but in vain." At Mid-Lent Henry knighted

him at Windsor, and publicly gave out that he was to

proceed at once to Ireland, where he was destined to be

king.”

The dominions of the English Crown in Ireland were

defined by the treaty made between the Irish Ard-Righ,

Roderic of Connaught, and Henry II. in October I 175 as

consisting of the ancient Irish kingdoms of Meath and

Leinster, the cities of Dublin and Waterford, and a tract

of land extending from Waterford as far as, and including,

Dungarvan.” Meath had been granted by Henry in 1171

to Hugh de Lacy to hold in chief of the Crown by the

service of fifty knights;* Leinster had been granted a few

weeks before to Richard de Clare, earl of Striguil.” The

cities of Dublin and Wexford and the territory appertaining

to each of them, which had been held by the Ostmen, were

not included in these grants, but were reserved by Henry

to himself, and placed under the charge of custodians

appointed by him. His authority over the whole area

occupied by his subjects in Ireland was represented by a

governor whose headquarters were at Dublin, and who at

the time of the treaty was Earl Richard, the lord of

Leinster."

On the side of the invaders and their king, the treaty

was made only to be broken. Henry on his visit to

1185

1175

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 362, 363.

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 336; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 34.

* Treaty in Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 102, Io9.

* Charter in Lyttelton, Henry II. (ed. 1767), vol. iv. p. 295; Song of

Dermot (ed. Orpen), vv. 2725-32 ; cf. Rot. Chart. p. 178. The statement in

Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 163 (copied by R. Howden, vol. ii. p. 134) that the

service was that of a hundred knights is clearly a mistake.

* Song of Dermot, vv. 2617-22.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 298.


IRE LAND

according to the treaty of 1175.

º Hingdom of Roderic

º Overlordship of Roderic

º Domain of Henry

ſº Overlordship of Henry

London: Macmillan & Co.,Ltd.

ºrds

ºg:

s

º








As roº, tº A

Tº uſ is - … ATION5.

-*


I JOHAW LACKLAND I3

*** **

Ireland in II 71-72 had established constables of his own

in two other towns, Limerick and Cork." Cork, though not

named in the treaty, and therefore implicitly included in

that portion of the island over which he renounced all

claims to ownership, seems nevertheless to have been

continuously occupied by his officers; it was certainly in

their hands in November I 177.* Limerick had been

recovered by the Irish, probably when all Henry's garrisons

were recalled from Ireland to swell his forces in Normandy

in I 173. It was, however, stormed and captured early in

October I 175 — only a few days before the treaty with

Roderic was signed—by Earl Richard's brother-in-law and

constable, Raymond the Fat, and his cousin Meiler Fitz-

Henry.” They evacuated it, indeed, six months later, when

Raymond was recalled by Henry to England on the death

of Earl Richard in May 1 176; * but Raymond's infraction

of the treaty was not the reason for his recall;" and the

withdrawal of his troops from Limerick was due not to

any order from the king, but to his own sense of the

difficulty of holding a place so remote from the other

Norman-Welsh settlements in Ireland. Henry, when he

heard of the affair, merely remarked ; “Great was the

daring shown in seizing the place, but the only wisdom

was in leaving it.”" In 1171-72 he had made, it is said,

a grant of Ulster to John de Courcy “if he could conquer

it by force.” At the opening of 1177 De Courcy set

forth to try whether he could make this grant effectual,

and by February 2 he had taken the city of Down.”

Shortly afterwards, Miles Cogan, who was constable of

Dublin under the new governor-general, William Fitz-

Audeline, made a raid into Connaught as far as Tuam.”

A few weeks later, Henry himself openly flung his treaty

1 Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 277. * Ib. p. 348.

* Ib. pp. 321-3. Cf. Song of Dermot, vv. 3370 to end.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 332, 333.

* Ib. pp. 327, 328. "I", pp. 333, 334.

7 Song of Dermot, vv. 2733-5.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 339; Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 137, 138. Cf. Four

Masters and Ann. Loch Cé, a. I 177.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 346. Cf. Four Masters and Ann. Loch Cé, a. 1177.

I 171-77




I4 JOHN LACKLAND CHAP.

1177 with Roderic to the winds. According to one account, he

bade Earl Hugh of Chester “go into Ireland and subdue

it for him and his son John, to whom he had granted it;

for he had obtained leave from Pope Alexander to crown

and make king in Ireland whichever of his sons he might

choose; and he bade the said earl conquer the kings and

princes of Ireland who would not submit to him.” The

commission was probably given not to Hugh of Chester,

but to Hugh de Lacy, who was certainly appointed governor

in Ireland shortly afterwards." However this may have

been, in May I 177 Henry, in a great council at Oxford,

arrogated to himself the right of disposing at his pleasure

not only of the territories in Ireland which were already

conquered, but also of the whole of Munster. Leinster

was at this time in his own hands; for Earl Richard's heir

was a girl, and therefore a ward of the king. He confirmed

Hugh de Lacy's tenure of Meath, and gave him the custody

of Dublin, which carried with it the office of governor-

general; he appointed William Fitz-Audeline—whom Hugh

was thus to supersede as governor—custodian of Wexford,

and Robert le Poer custodian of Waterford ; and he defined

the territory dependent upon the latter city as extending

not merely as far as Dungarvan (the limit specified in the

treaty of 1175), but as far as “the river which is beyond

Lismore,” that is, the Blackwater. Moreover, he granted

to Robert Fitz-Stephen and Miles de Cogan in fee, for the

service of sixty knights, “the kingdom of Cork,” South

Munster, or Desmond;” and to Herbert and William Fitz-

Herbert and their nephew Jocelyn de la Pommeraye, on

the same terms, “the kingdom of Limerick,” North Munster,

or Thomond. From each of these grants the capital city,

with the Ostmen's cantred attached to it, was excluded,

being expressly reserved by Henry for “himself and his

heirs.” The recipients of all these grants did liege homage

and swore fealty to John as well as to Henry.”

1. Cf. Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 161 with Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 347.

* Defined as extending “towards the Cape of S. Brendan [Knock Brandon]

on the sea-coast, and towards Limerick and other parts, and as far as the water

near Lismore.” Ware's Antiquities of Ireland, ed. Harris, p. 194.

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 162-5. º

º

.* *


IRE LAND

according to Henry's distribution, 177

Eloman of the English Crown.

Fiefs held of the English Crown.

º Płefs granted by Henry

but not yet conjuered -

r shº

Knock Branda

erry

Stanfºrd's GeogºEstab: Zondon.

London: Macmillan & Co.Ltd.












. . . . . . . . .” "

- * : * : * ,

v P- *. | lº

| As Cº. 1 -

TILºen. Fr


The grant of Thomond to the two Fitz-Herberts and

their nephew was shortly afterwards annulled at their own

request, on the ground that this realm “was not yet won or

subdued to the king's authority”; evidently they did not

feel equal to the task of winning it. Henry then offered

its investiture to Philip de Braose, who accepted it; and

this time the city of Limerick, with its cantred, was either

included in the enfeoffment, or, more probably, Philip was

appointed to hold it, when won, as custodian for the king."

The “kingdom of Cork” was also as yet unconquered ; but

here the grantees had the advantage of being supported

by an English constable, Richard of London, in Cork itself.

They seem to have compelled or persuaded the king of

Desmond, Dermot MacCarthy, to some agreement, in virtue

of which they are said to have obtained peaceable possession

of “the seven cantreds nearest to the city,” and divided

these between themselves, Fitz-Stephen taking the three

eastern, Cogan the four western ; and they seem also to

have been appointed by Henry joint custodians of the city

of Cork, in succession to Richard of London.” As for the

other twenty-four cantreds which made up the rest of their

promised territory, they agreed to divide the tribute equally

between them, “when it should come.”*

Philip de Braose had helped Cogan and Fitz-Stephen

to effect their settlement in Desmond; they now went to

help him to gain possession of Limerick. As the three

adventurers and their little band of Welsh followers reached

the bank of the Shannon, the citizens noticed their approach

and fired the town before their eyes. De Braose lost heart,

and “chose rather to return safe to his home than to try

the risks of fortune in a land so hostile and so remote”; “

and it does not appear that he ever obtained any footing

in the country. Cogan and Fitz-Stephen held their seven

1. Cf. Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 172, 173; Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 347, with

Mr. Dimock's note 6; and Rot. Chart. p. 84 b.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 348. The removal of William Fitz-Audeline from

the office of viceroy seems to have involved the displacement of the subordinate

officers appointed by him, of whom Richard of London was one.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 348. Cf. Ware, Antiq. pp. 194, 195.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 349.

1177


cantreds in Desmond and the city of Cork for five years;

then, in II 82, Cogan was slain by an Irish chieftain," and

the natives rose at once throughout the district. They

besieged Fitz-Stephen in Cork; his nephew, Raymond the

Fat, went to his rescue by sea, and managed to throw

himself and some troops into the city; while King Henry,

as soon as the news reached him, despatched Miles Cogan's

brother Richard, with some soldiers, from England to take

Miles's place.” In 1183, or very soon after, Fitz-Stephen

died; * Henry then appointed Raymond sole constable of

Cork, and Raymond contrived to restore at least some

degree of “English"—more properly to be called Norman-

Welsh—ascendency throughout the cantreds occupied in

I 177, of which the western ones were apparently now held

by Richard de Cogan as heir to Miles, while Raymond

was recognized by Henry as tenant-in-chief of the eastern

ones in succession to Fitz-Stephen, who had no heirs." The

temporary loss of ground in the south in II 82 was more

than counterbalanced by the successes of John de Courcy

in the same year at the opposite extremity of the island,

where he seems to have effected a permanent settlement in

Dalriada, though probably only along the coast.”

The internal condition of the so-called “English "

dominion in Ireland, meanwhile, was not altogether satis-

factory to the king. It was of course necessary that he

should have a viceroy there to represent him and to hold the

feudataries in check; but for that very reason the viceroy

was always, simply as viceroy, an object of jealousy to the

other barons; and the viceroy who had been appointed in

I 177, Hugh de Lacy, presently incurred the distrust of the

king himself. Hugh's rivals accused him of currying favour

with the Irish in the hope of making himself an independent

sovereign ; and on his marriage with a daughter of the king

of Connaught, a marriage contracted “according to the

1182-83

1 Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 350. Cf. note (e) to Four Masters, a. 1182, and

Ann. Loch Cé, a. 1182.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 350, 351.

* Dic. Wat. Biog. s.v. “Fitz-Stephen, Robert.”

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 350.

* Ware, Antiq. pp. 196, 197.


; , , is tº : A YO. F. K.

I tº | R ATV

i As Toº, L. Nox A.D º

L TILDEN Fo ap/ATIONS.

- - - -






IRE LAND

A.D. 778.5.

London: Macmillan & Co.Ltd.

Swºrds ºf




manner of that country” and without King Henry's leave,

Henry in May 1 181 removed him from his office and sum-

moned him to England, sending the constable of Chester

and Richard de Pec to Ireland as joint governors in his

stead. Hugh's disgrace, however, lasted only six months;

he returned to Dublin as governor at the end of the year."

Meanwhile Henry was providing himself with a new instru-

ment for working out his purposes in Ireland. The saintly

and patriotic archbishop of Dublin, S. Laurence O'Toole,

had died in November 1 180 ;* Henry kept the see vacant

ten months, and then, in September 1 181, gave it to an

English clerk and confidant of his own, John Cumin. The

new archbishop was consecrated by the Pope on March 21,

I 182; * but more than two years elapsed before he set foot

in his diocese. At last, in August 1 184, he was sent over

by Henry to prepare the way for the coming of John.” It

was doubtless for the same purpose that Hugh de Lacy was

again superseded as governor; at the beginning of September

he was replaced by Philip of Worcester, whose first work

was to recover for the Crown certain lands which Hugh had

alienated, and whose next undertaking was a plundering

raid upon the clergy and churches of Armagh, achieved with

great success in March I 185.”

On April 24 John sailed from Milford * with a fleet of

sixty ships," which carried some three hundred knights, a large

body of archers, and a train of other followers. Next day

they all landed at Waterford.” There the neighbouring Irish

chieftains came to salute the son of the English king. The

knights of John's suite, young and reckless like himself,

jeered at the dress and manners of these Irishmen, and

even pulled some of them by their beards, which they wore

long and flowing according to their national custom. The

1. Cf. Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 353-6, and Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 270.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 357, 358. Cf. Gesta Hen. l.c., where the date is

wº, Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 280, 287, and Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 358.

Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 359.

Ib. pp. 359, 360; Four Masters, a. I 185.

Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 38o.

Four Masters, a. 1185.

Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 381.

:

I 181-84

1185


insulted chieftains reported to their brethren in more remote

districts the indignity with which they had been treated; and

in consequence, the kings and princes of Munster and Con-

naught not only refused to attend John's court, but agreed

among themselves to oppose him by force." Archbishop

Cumin, who had been sent over on purpose that he might

set an example of clerical submission and lend John the

support of his countenance as spiritual head of the province

over which John was to be the secular ruler, of course

welcomed the lad as his sovereign and gave him his homage

and fealty, and so did the lay barons who owed their posses-

sions in Ireland to King Henry; but among the survivors

and representatives of the original Norman-Welsh conquerors

the king's son—like the king himself fourteen years before

—evidently received but a half-hearted welcome;” and John

did nothing to gain their confidence or their respect. He

ordered castles to be built at Lismore and at two places on

the Suir, Ardfinnan and Tibraghny; * beyond this he seems

to have taken no measures to oppose the threatened coalition

of the Irish princes and people; and while they were openly

joining hands against him, he was spending in riotous living

the money which had been destined for the pay of the

soldiers who had come with him from England. When

these soldiers demanded their wages, he met them with a

refusal.” Some of them, whom he had left to garrison the

new castles at Ardfinnan and Tibraghny, provided for them-

selves by making plundering raids into Munster, till they

were defeated with great slaughter by the king of Thomond,

Donell O'Brien ;" most of the others refused to serve John

any longer, and went over to the Irish.” Such was the

characteristic beginning of John's public life. Equally char-

acteristic was the facility with which he escaped from the

consequences of his criminal folly. In September, finding

himself on the verge of ruin, he hurried back to his father's

court and laid the blame of his ill-success upon Hugh de

| Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 389.

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 339.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 386; Four Masters, a. 1185.

1185

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 339.

* Four Masters, a. 1185. * Gesta Hen. l.c.


Lacy, whom he accused of plotting with the Irish against

him." The task of repairing the mischief wrought by his

five months’ stay in Ireland was entrusted by Henry to John

de Courcy as governor-general.”

Within a few months, however, the king again took up

his cherished scheme with renewed eagerness and hope.

“Lord of Ireland” was the title which John had assumed

during his visit to that country,” as it was the title by which

Henry had claimed authority over the Irish princes; but

ever since I 177 Henry had been planning to secure for his

son a more definite basis of power, by having him crowned

and anointed as king. For this the Pope's permission was

necessary; Alexander III. was said to have granted it,” but

his grant seems never to have been embodied in a bull, and

Lucius III., who succeeded him in 1181, absolutely refused

to sanction Henry's project. When Lucius died, in November

I 185, Henry at once despatched an embassy to his successor,

Urban III., “and from him he obtained many things which

Pope Lucius had strongly resisted ; of which things this was

one, that whichever of his sons he might choose should be

crowned and anointed king of Ireland.”" This grant Urban

is said to have confirmed by a bull, and by sending to Henry

a crown of peacock's feathers set in gold." Bull and crown

were probably brought by two legates who are expressly

described as commissioned by Urban as legates for Ireland,

“to crown John king of that country.” But these envoys

did not reach England till Christmas Eve 1 186; 7 and

meanwhile, in August, news had come that “a certain Irish-

man had cut off the head of Hugh de Lacy,” whereupon

Henry bade John proceed at once to Ireland and seize Hugh's

* Four Masters, l.c.; Ann. Loch Cé, a. 1185.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 392. -

* In several of John's Irish charters granted during his father's lifetime he

styles himself simply “Johannes filius Regis”; when he does use a title, it is

“Dominus Hiberniae,” or, apparently, in one case (Hist. MSS. Comm. 3rd Report,

p. 231), “Dux Hiberniae.”

* Gesta Hen. vol. i. p. 161. * Ib. p. 339.

* R. Howden, vol. ii. pp. 306, 307. No such bull is now known, but there

seems no reason to doubt the story.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 346; Gesta Hen. vol. ii. pp. 3, 4; R. Diceto, vol.

ii. p. 47.

º

1185

I 186


2O JOHN LACKLAND chap.

vast estates there." John, however, was still in England

when the legates arrived; possibly his father detained him

on learning that they were actually on their way. But they

had no sooner landed than they offended Archbishop Bald-

win of Canterbury by wearing their mitres and having their

crosses carried before them in his cathedral church; and

they repeated the insult in the king's court, to the great

indignation of Baldwin and his suffragans.” Under these

circumstances it would obviously have been impossible to let

them crown John in Baldwin's province; and if Henry

entertained any idea of sending them and John to Ireland

together, that the rite might be performed there, he speedily

abandoned it. Baldwin, in fact, to rid himself of the legates,

advised the king to employ them in France, as mediators in

the disputes which were arising between Henry and Philip

Augustus out of the death of Geoffrey of Britanny, the

minority of Geoffrey's daughter, and the critical condition of

his widow. Henry accepted the suggestion, sent John to

Normandy instead of to Ireland,” and himself followed with

the legates on February 17 (1187)."

No pacification between the kings was arrived at, and at

Whitsuntide both openly prepared for war. This was the

first real war in which John took part; for his attacks upon

Aquitaine in I 184 had been mere raids, probably directed

by Geoffrey, and it was not under his personal leadership

that his mercenaries had fought their losing fight with the

Irish in Munster. Now he was appointed to command one

of the four bodies into which King Henry divided his host;

the other three being entrusted to Richard, Earl William de

Mandeville, and Geoffrey the chancellor.” The position of

these different bodies of troops at the opening of the cam-

paign is obscure. One English authority states that when

Philip began the war by laying siege to Châteauroux, Richard

and John were both within its walls." A contemporary

I 186

1187

* Cf. Gesta Hen. vol. i. pp. 350, 361 ; Four Masters, a. I 186; Gir. Cambr.

vol. v. p. 387, and R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 34, who gives the day of Hugh's

death—July 25—but under a wrong year.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. i. p. 346; Gesta Hen. vol. ii. p. 4.

* Gesta Hen. vol. ii. p. 4. * Ib. Cf. R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 47.

* Gesta Hen. vol. ii. p. 6. 6 Iº.


French historian, however, who was probably better informed,

says that when Philip besieged Châteauroux Henry and

Richard proceeded together to its relief;” and it appears

that John accompanied his father and brother, for we are

told that “John who is called Lackland, being sent by his

father, chanced to be present” when one of Richard's mercen-

aries broke off an arm of a statue in the church of Our Lady,

whereupon the figure bled as if it were alive; and John

picked up the severed arm and carried it off as a holy relic.”

One contemporary asserts that Richard's subsequent deser-

tion of his father was owing to Philip's communicating to

him a letter in which Henry proposed that Philip's sister

Adela, Richard's betrothed, should marry John instead of

Richard, and that John should succeed to the whole of his

dominions except England and Normandy.