Guthlac was a blackened desert"—whether its details

be literally exact or not, pictures vividly the mood of the

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 382 ; R. Coggeshall, p. 183; W. Coventry,

vol. ii. p. 231 ; Itin. a. 18; and Rot. Pat. p. 197 b.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 382.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 179. * R. Wendover, l.c.

* /tin. a. 18.

* M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. pp. 189-190. Cf. Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 667.

Matthew gives no precise date; but he implies that it was before Michaelmas;

and the Itinerary shows that the only possible date is September 21-22, on the

way from Rockingham to Lincoln.


tyrant. It is little wonder that when the tidings of his

advance reached Lincoln, Gilbert and his men “fled before

his face, dreading his presence like lightning.”" They prob-

ably fled into the Isle of Axholme, for from Lincoln John

went by way of Barton” and Scotter to Stowe, where he

stayed three days, and whence he appears to have sent his

mercenaries across the Trent to ravage the Isle with fire

and sword. He returned to Lincoln on the 28th, to find

that Alexander had spent two or three days there in his

absence,” and had slipped past him into Yorkshire. John,

however, was less eager for the capture of “the little sandy

fox” than for vengeance upon the English rebels. From

Lincoln northward to Grimsby, and thence south again to

Spalding, the Lincolnshire fields—now, at the beginning of

October, all white to harvest”—were given to the flames,

and the houses and farm-buildings sacked and destroyed by

the terrible host with the king at its head.” On October 9

he appeared before Lynn ;" here the townsfolk, like most of

their class throughout England, were on his side, and they

gave him not only a joyous welcome, but a substantial con-

tribution in money." He committed the custody of the

town and the duty of fortifying it to Savaric de Mauléon,”

whom on September 30 he had sent back to Crowland to

“seek out and capture the knights and men-at-arms, enemies

of the king, who were hiding in secret places” among the

fens around the monastery. Savaric had “failed to find

those whom he sought”; but he had dragged some fugitives

out of sanctuary in the abbey, and brought back a valuable

spoil of flocks and herds to his master at Lynn."

Louis had now been besieging Dover for more than two

months, and had made no progress at all. The strength of

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 382 ; for date see Itin. a. 18.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 289; probably one of several small places so called,

on the eastern side of the Trent.

* Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 231, and Itin. a. 18.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 381.

* Cf. ib., W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 231, and Itin. a. 18.

6 ſtin. a. 18.

7 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 384.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 183.

° W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 232.

1216

Sept. 22

Sept.

26-28


the castle, the skill and valour of Hubert de Burgh and the

hundred and forty knights who, with the usual complement

of men-at-arms, constituted its garrison, were more than a

match for all his forces. He swore that he would not quit the

place till he had hanged every man within its walls;” but

even the fall of one of its towers seemed to have brought him

no nearer to effecting an entrance.” He could only turn the

siege into a blockade, and wait till starvation should accomplish

the work in which battery and assault had failed. In the

country at large he was distinctly losing ground. Through-

out the summer he had been set at nought in Sussex by

a young Flemish adventurer called William of Casinghem,

who, “scorning to do him homage, gathered together a

thousand bowmen, lodged in the wilderness and woods with

which that country abounded, and gave the French great

trouble all through the time of war, slaying many thousands

of them.” ” On September 2 John wrote a letter of en-

couragement to an association extending through Sussex,

Kent, Surrey and Hampshire, composed of persons whom

he describes as “sworn and confederate together for fealty

and service to ourself,” although they had been compelled

against their will to swear allegiance to his rival. The

“barons”—that is, the citizens—of Hastings, Sandwich,

Dover, Hythe, Romney, Winchelsea, Rye, Pevensey, Shore-

ham and Portsmouth, who had also, under compulsion, taken

the oath to Louis, had likewise assured John of their devotion

to himself, and were in return assured of his favour; while

the men of Seaford had resisted all the pressure put upon

them by their lord, Gilbert de Laigle, to forsake their

allegiance, and were on September 3 warmly thanked by John

for their loyalty." Soon after the beginning of the siege of

Dover Louis was joined from over sea by the count of

Perche, and in September or October by Peter of Britanny;

1216

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 38o.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 179.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 370. The leader's name comes from Hist, des

Ducs, p. 181; M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 655, has corrupted it into

“Collingham.” See also Ann. Dunst. a. 1215. On William de Casinghem’s

relations with John see Rot. Pat. pp. 185, 186. He figures frequently in the

Rolls of the next reign.

* Rot. Pat. p. 196.




the arrival of this last, however, brought no real gain, for

as soon as Peter reached England, his brother, Robert of

Dreux, returned to France. Louis's English partizans, too,

were falling away. Earl William of Albemarle offered his

repentance and his services to John, who of course “forgave

him most kindly.”* Of yet greater importance was the

return to allegiance of William of Salisbury; it was he who,

in conjunction with Falkes de Bréauté, captured or put to

flight a body of Louis's adherents who were besieging Exeter.”

At last, however, a gleam of light fell across the gloomy

prospects of the French party. Towards the middle of

October Hubert de Burgh and his lieutenant, Gerard de

Sotinghem, felt that they could not hold out much longer,

and asked for a truce, that they might send to John either

for succour, or for leave to surrender the castle. The truce

was granted, and on the 14th the siege of Dover was

suspended.”

The crisis had come ; it had, however, really come not

on the cliffs of Kent, but on the shores of the Wash.

Sumptuously entertained by the burghers of Lynn, John,

who—unlike most of his race—was a notorious glutton,

feasted till his excesses brought on a violent attack of

dysentery 4 which he himself seems to have recognized as

the beginning of the end. One of the latest entries on the

Patent Rolls of his reign is probably significant of the

remorse awakened in him, for one at least of his many

crimes, by the terror of approaching death; on October Io

he granted to Margaret, wife of Walter de Lacy, some land

in the royal forest of Acornbury, that she might build thereon

a religious house for the souls of her father, mother and

brother"—William, Maud and the younger William de

Braose. He could not rest; ill as he was, he moved next

day from Lynn to Wisbeach; and early on the following

morning he set out again. “Like a swiftly advancing

1 Hist, des Ducs, p. 179.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 1215.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 182. Cf. Hist, des Ducs, p. 180, and W. Coventry,

vol. ii. p. 232.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 183. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 231.

* Rot. Pat. p. 199.

I216

Oct. II

Oct. 12




1216

storm,” before which all men fled, he swept northward to

the mouth of the Welland, and thence in his impatience set

out to cross the Wash without waiting either for the ebb of

the tide or for any one who knew the way to guide him

across the treacherous soil, covered as it was with brackish

water. Suddenly the whole host, while struggling with the

waves, felt the ground opening beneath its feet. The king

himself and a part of his troops with difficulty reached the

further shore; the rest of his followers and the whole of his

baggage train, with all his treasure and his lately gathered

spoils, men, horses, arms, tents, provisions, “everything in

the world that he held most dear, short of his own life,”

went down into the quicksand." When at night he reached

Swineshead abbey, rage and grief threw him into a fever,

which he aggravated by supping greedily on peaches and

new cider.” With great difficulty he made his way on the

14th to Sleaford.” There he was found, probably on the

I 5th, by the messengers whom Hubert de Burgh had sent

from Dover to seek him. Their tidings brought on a fresh

access of fever, which bleeding failed to relieve.” Nothing

Oct. 15-16 could check his restlessness; that night or next morning

he set out for Newark, and in spite of grievous bodily

suffering, he set out on horseback. He had, however, ridden

only three or four miles, “panting and groaning,” when

increasing sickness compelled him to dismount, and he bade

his followers make him a litter in which he might travel more

easily. There was no workman to make it, and nothing to

make it of ; all that his men could do was to cut down with

their swords and knives the willows by the roadside, weave

them together as best they might, and throw a horse-cloth

1. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 384; M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 190;

and R. Coggeshall, pp. 183, 184.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 385; M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 191.

The later legends about the cause of John's death are not worth notice.

* R. Wendover, l.c., says John left Swineshead “summo diluculo.” The

Itinerary shows him there on October 12 and 13, and at Sleaford on the

14th and 15th.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 183. Louis had raised the siege of Dover only on the

14th, but the truce must have been arranged and the messengers despatched

at least a day or two earlier, or the latter could not possibly have overtaken

John at Sleaford. They must in any case have travelled with marvellous

rapidity.


over them. This litter, without cushions or even straw to

relieve its hardness, had for want of carriage-horses to be

either slung between some of the high-mettled destriers

of the knights, or carried on the shoulders of the men.

Its shaking and jolting soon proved intolerable: “This

accursed litter has broken all my bones, and well-nigh

killed me,” cried the king in an agony of pain and rage.

Matthew Paris quotes a French rime concerning the sons

of Henry II. which thus foretold their fate: “Henry, the

fairest, shall die at Martel ; Richard, the Poitevin, shall die

in the Limousin ; John shall die, a landless king, in a litter.”

The prediction was all but fulfilled ; John, however, gathered

up strength and spirit enough to avoid a literal fulfilment

of its closing words, and to ride “on an ambling nag” into

Newark."

For three days, in the bishop of Lincoln's castle whose

ruins still look down upon the Trent, the king lay dying.

The abbot of Croxton, who was skilled in medicine, attended

him as his physician,” and also ministered to his soul, for he

persuaded him to confess his sins and receive the Holy

Communion.” Then the one natural affection traceable in

John's character broke out in anxiety for his two little sons,

especially for the elder of them, to whom the crown must

devolve. He solemnly declared Henry his heir, made those

around him take an oath of fealty to the boy, and sent letters

to the sheriffs and the constables of the royal castles, bidding

them look to him as their lord.” He had already, on October

15, before leaving Sleaford, dictated a letter entreating for

1 M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. pp. 191, 192. He relates all this as having

occurred on the road from Swineshead to Sleaford, where he makes John die; a

characteristic piece of confusion, illustrative of Matthew’s careless way of reading

the author on whose work his own is based. The itinerary given by Roger of

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 385, is perfectly accurate and perfectly clear.

* M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 668.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 385. The long account inserted by Matthew

Paris in his Hist. Angl. (vol. ii. p. 193)—not, it is to be observed, in his Chron.

Maj.-of John's forgiveness of the barons and good advice to his heir is evidently

intended for the edification of Henry III. and of posterity, and if it has any

foundation at all, it is inserted in a wrong place; for it is put after John's last

Communion, whereas the abbot obviously must have insisted upon John's declaring

himself to be in charity with all men (the barons, by implication at least, included)

before he gave him the Sacrament. l

4 R. Wendover, l.c. f

I216

Oct. I6-18




I216

Henry the special protection of the Pope." He now

appointed Peter de Mauley guardian of his younger son

Richard, whom he had apparently left under Peter's charge

in Corfe castle. There was but one man in England to

whom he could confidently entrust the guardianship of the

heir to the throne. “Before he died, he sent word to

William the Marshal, the earl of Pembroke, that he placed

his eldest son, Henry, in God's keeping and his, and besought

him for God's sake that he would take thought for Henry's

interest.” ”

The abbot of Croxton then asked the king where he

wished to be buried. “I commend my body and my soul

to God and to S. Wulfstan” was John's reply.” His last

act seems to have been the dictation of the fragmentary

document which has come down to us as his will. “Being

overtaken,” he says, “by grievous sickness, and thus in-

capable of making a detailed disposition of all my goods, I

commit the ordering and disposing of my will to the fidelity

and discretion of my faithful men whose names are written

below, without whose counsel, were they at hand, I would

not, even if in health, ordain anything ; and I ratify and

confirm whatsoever they shall faithfully ordain and de-

termine concerning my goods, for the purposes of making

satisfaction to God and Holy Church for the wrongs I have

done them, sending help to the realm of Jerusalem, furnish-

ing support to my sons for the recovery and defence of

their heritage, rewarding those who have served us faith-

fully, and distributing alms to the poor and to religious

houses for the salvation of my soul. And I pray that

whosoever shall give them counsel and assistance herein

may receive God's grace and favour; and may he who shall

violate the settlement made by them incur the curse and

wrath of God Almighty and the Blessed Mary and all the

saints. First, then, I desire that my body be buried in the

church of the Blessed Mary and S. Wulfstan of Worcester.

Now I appoint as ordainers and disposers of my will the

* Baronius, Annales (ed. Mansi), vol. xx. p. 397.

* Hist, des Ducs, p. 180. Cf. Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 15167-88.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 385.


following persons:—the lord Gualo, by God's grace cardinal 1216

priest of the title of S. Martin, legate of the Apostolic See;

Peter, lord bishop of Winchester; Richard, lord bishop of

Chichester; Silvester, lord bishop of Worcester; Brother

Aimeric of Ste. Maure; William the Marshal, earl of

Pembroke ; Ranulf, earl of Chester; William, earl of

Ferrars; William Brewer; Walter de Lacy; John of Mon-

mouth ; Savaric de Mauléon ; Falkes de Bréauté.” Here,

without date, signature or seal, the so-called will breaks off

abruptly; evidently the testator had not time to complete

it. At midnight a whirlwind swept over Newark with such Oct. 18.19

violence that the townsfolk thought their houses would fall,

and in that hour of elemental disturbance and human

terror the king passed away.” A monk named John of

Savigny, entering the town at daybreak, met the servants Oct. 19

of the royal household hurrying out laden with everything

of their master's that they could carry. The corpse—for

which they had not left even a decent covering *—had

meanwhile been hastily embalmed by the abbot of Croxton ;

John having, it is said, made a grant of his heart, with ten

pounds' worth of land, to Croxton abbey.” The abbot, too,

fled as soon as his work was done and his strange relic

secured ; it was John of Savigny who, at the request of the

constable of Newark, kept the last watch beside the body

and offered his mass that morning for the soul of the dead

king." The body was then dressed in such semblance of

royal attire as could be procured, and the remnant of John's

soldiers—nearly all foreign mercenaries—formed themselves

into a guard for its protection on the journey from Newark

to Worcester. The grim funeral train, every man in full

armour, passed unhindered across England, and John was

buried by Bishop Silvester in Worcester cathedral according

to his desire.”

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 144.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 184. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 231, and R. Wen-

dover, vol. iii. p. 385.

* R. Coggeshall, l.c.

4 Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 232; M. Paris, Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 668;

and Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 194.

* R. Coggeshall, l.c.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 385, 386.


286 JOHN LACKLAND CHAP. VI

1216

Within this tomb lies buried a monarch's outward form,

Whose inner man's departure hath stilled war's raging storm.

Thus may be roughly rendered the opening lines of an

epitaph on King John preserved by Roger of Wendover."

The poet's words are true; John's death virtually ended the

war. From his burial the Marshal, the Legate, and the

bishops passed to the crowning of his heir and the publica-

tion, in the boy-king's name, of the Great Charter in a

revised form to which Gualo had no hesitation in giving

the papal sanction, and which, thus safeguarded, left the

revolutionary party no excuse for continuing the struggle.

Thenceforth it was idle for Louis and his adherents to

pretend that they were fighting for England's deliverance

from bondage; all men could see that they were fighting

for her enslavement to a foreign conqueror. The majority

of the barons had already become conscious of the blunder,

or worse than blunder, which they had committed in calling

the stranger to their aid, and were ready now to join in a

national movement for his expulsion. His enterprise was

doomed to fail when the kingdom ceased to be divided

against itself; and the one insuperable obstacle to the

healing of its divisions was removed in the person of John.

It was John whose very existence had made peace im-

possible. “Forasmuch as when he came to die he possessed

none of his land in peace,” says Matthew Paris, “he is

called Lackland.”” John had indeed earned for himself in

a new sense the name which his father had given him at

his birth; and he had earned it not by blunders in state-

craft or errors in strategy, not by weakness or cowardice or

sloth, but by the almost superhuman wickedness of a life

which, twenty years before its end, a historian of deeper

insight than Matthew had characterized in one memorable

phrase—“Nature's enemy, John.”

* “Hoc in sarcophago sepelitur regis imago,

Qui moriens multum sedavit in orbe tumultum.”

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 386.

* M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 191. *


JOHN LACKLAND 287

NOTE I

JoHN AND THE DE BRAOSEs

The fullest account of the quarrel of King John and William de

Braose is contained in a document printed in Foedera, vol. i. pt. i.

pp. 1 of, Io9. This is a letter or manifesto addressed by John,

after the fall of De Braose, “to all who may read it,” witnessed by

the justiciar (Geoffrey Fitz-Peter), the earls of Salisbury, Winchester,

Clare, Hertford, and Ferrars, Robert Fitz-Walter, William Brewer,

Hugh de Neville, William d'Aubigny, Adam de Port, Hugh de

Gournay, William de Mowbray “and others,” and evidently

intended as a public defence of the king's conduct towards William.

Coming from John, and under such circumstances, its truthfulness

is necessarily open to suspicion; but it is hardly conceivable that:

so many witnesses of such rank and character as those enumerated

should have set their hands to it if it contained any gross mis-

representations of matters which must have been well known to

most of them; one of these witnesses, indeed, the earl of Ferrars,

is stated in the letter itself to have been De Braose's own nephew,

and another, Adam de Port, his brother-in-law. The only point on

which the letter seems to be at variance with any other contem-

porary authority is the amount of the debt owed by De Braose to

the king at the end of 12 o'7 or beginning of 1208. John says

(l.c. p. 107), that William then owed him the whole of the 50oo

marks due for the honour of Limerick, and had only paid him one

sum of Ioo marks for the ferm of the city “which he had held for

five years” (strictly speaking, it was, at the utmost, four years and

a half). The Pipe Rolls of 1206, 1207, 1208, 1209, and 12 Io

(8-12 John), however, all state the sum still owed by William for

the honour of Limerick as 4,2865:6: 8 (= 42.98 marks), thus

implying that 24,468, or 702 marks, had been paid before Michael-

mas 1206. In the Roll of that year the city of Limerick is not

mentioned; but in each of the later Rolls William is said to owe

480 for its tallage, and Ioo marks for its ferm for one year (Sweet-

man, Calendar, vol. i. pp. 46, 55, 58, 68). This does not necessarily

imply that the ferm for the other years had not been paid; for the

original grant of the custody of the city of Limerick to De Braose

in July 1203 and the writ ordering its restoration to him in August

1205 both specify that he is to pay its ferm “to our exchequer in

Dublin’” (Rot. Chart. p. 107 b ; Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 47). As there

are no remaining records of the Dublin Exchequer of so early a

date, we cannot certainly know what was or was not paid in there.


º

º

The strange thing is not that the English Exchequer should claim

only one year's ferm for Limerick, but that it should have any

claim at all in the matter. The restoration of the city to De

Braose in August 12os was ordered to be conditional on his finding

security, within forty days, for the payment of the arrears of the

ferm. That the restoration was actually made, and therefore that

he gave the security, is plain; but there is nothing to show that he

ever redeemed his pledge, or that he paid the ferm for the succeed-

ing years.

The story of John's vengeance on the family of De Braose

appears, in slightly varied forms, in almost every chronicle of the

period. Ralph of Coggeshall (p. 164), Roger of Wendover (vol.

iii. p. 235) and the Brut y Tywysogion (a. 1209) say the victims

were “slain in Windsor castle”; the Annals of Dunstable and of

Oseney (a. 1210), that they “died in prison,” without specifying

where or how. The Barnwell Annalist (W. Coventry, vol. ii. p.

202) and the Annals of Margan, Tewkesbury, Waverley, Winchester,

and Worcester (a. 12 Io) say they were starved to death. The

Hist, des Ducs de Mormandie (pp. 114-115) says they were imprisoned

“el castiel del Corf,” with no food save “une garbe d’avoine e i

bacon cru,” and describes with gruesome minuteness the attitudes

in which, on the eleventh day, they were found dead. Ralph of

Coggeshall makes the victims William de Braose's wife and “sons”

(filii); Roger of Wendover, his wife, eldest son, and that son's

wife; the Ann. Winton., wife and “younger” son; the Ann.

Tewkesb., wife and “children” (liberi); while the Ann. Dunst, say:

“Cepit [rex] Willelmum de Lacy, et Willelmum de Brause juniorem,

et sororem ejus, et Matildem matrem ejus; qui in carcere post

modum perierunt.” All the other writers speak only of the wife

and one son, whom the Ann. Osen, call “Willelmus primogenitus

ejus,” and the Ann. Wigorn. “haeres.” This latter version is

undoubtedly the correct one as to the last point; of De Braose's

three sons, the eldest, William, alone was in John's power; Giles,

the second, was bishop of Hereford and safe beyond the sea, while

the third, Reginald, had escaped capture, and lived to recover the

greater part of the family heritage. One of the daughters—the

wife of Hugh Mortimer—had been taken prisoner with her mother

and eldest brother (Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 107); but she did not

share their fate, for she was set free in 1214 (Rot. Pat vol. i. p.

122); and Roger of Wendover is certainly wrong about the

younger William's wife, who was still living in July 1220 (Royal

Letters, ed. Shirley, vol. i. p. 136). The elder William died, an

exile in France, about a year after this tragedy (R. Wend. vol. iii.

p. 237).


JOHN LACKLAND 289

NOTE II

EUSTACE DE WESCI AND ROBERT FITZ-WALTER

Eustace de Vesci and Robert Fitz-Walter have long figured in

history as typical examples of the way in which individual barons

were goaded into hatred and vengeance against John by his

invasions of their domestic peace, and also as foremost among the

“patriots” to whom England is supposed to be indebted for her

Great Charter. On both aspects of the lives of these two men—

especially of the life of Fitz-Walter, whom Professor Tout has

glorified as “the first champion of English liberty”—a few con-

siderations may be offered here.

1. The earliest mention of John's unsuccessful attempt to

entrap the wife of Eustace de Vesci is in an addition made by a

chronicler at Furness Abbey, writing c. 1270-1298, to the Stanley

chronicler's continuation of the history of William of Newburgh.

This Furness writer (Howlett, Chron. of Stephen, etc., vol. ii. p. 521)

merely states the bare fact, without any details, in the briefest and

simplest way, and without any clue to the date. Walter of

Hemingburgh, who was living in 1313, tells the story in an

elaborate form which is certainly not impossible, perhaps not even

very improbable, although it somewhat resembles a story in

Procopius (see Dic. Mat. Biogr: “Vesci, Eustace de”). Walter

gives it as an illustration of John's character, of which he inserts a

picture—painted in the most frightful colours—between the coming

of the Franciscans in 1212 and the rising of the barons in 1215;

but he connects the incident directly with the latter event, repre-

senting Eustace as inducing those of his fellow-barons whom the

king had injured in a similar way to join him in a common effort

for vengeance, which widens into the struggle for the Charter

(Hemingburgh, vol. i. pp. 24.7-9). The affair would thus seem

to have occurred some years after Eustace's desertion from the

king's host and flight from England in 1212 ; a desertion for which,

therefore, it cannot serve as an excuse.

2. The legend of Robert Fitz-Walter's daughter which became

famous in prose and verse in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-

turies is based upon a passage in the Chronicle of Dunmow, printed

in Monasticon, vol. vi. pt. i. p. 147. This chronicle, written in a

monastery of which the Fitz-Walters were patrons, begins with the

year 1 o'S4, but the MS. (Cott. Cleopatra C. iii.) is of the end of

the fifteenth century; it ends at the year 1501. The story is

placed in 1216, and is briefly this: John demands Robert's

U


daughter, the fair maiden Matilda; her father refuses to give her

up to him; the civil war breaks out, and the city of London joins

the barons; afterwards they are worsted, whereupon the king

destroys Robert's fortress in London—Castle Baynard—and causes

Matilda to be poisoned at Robert's manor of Dunmow. Mean-

while Robert has fled to France. War continues on both sides of

the Channel. Presently John goes to France, and has a conference

with Philip Augustus; Robert Fitz-Walter displays his prowess in a

single combat in presence of both the kings; John admires his

valour, they are reconciled, and remain friends from that time

forth. -

On a tale so monstrous and so nonsensical as this, comment is

needless. There is, however, a much earlier and more rational

account of the quarrel between John and Fitz-Walter. According

to the contemporary Histoire des Ducs de Mormandie, Robert Fitz-

Walter, “qui estoit uns des plus haus homes d'Engletierre et uns

des plus poissans” (he was lord of Dunmow in Essex, of Baynard's

Castle in London, and also, by his marriage with an heiress, of

large estates in the north), had two daughters, of whom the elder

was married to Geoffrey de Mandeville, eldest son of Geoffrey

Fitz-Peter, chief justiciar of England. “Une fois” when the king

was visiting Marlborough, a quarrel for lodgings arose between the

servants of this young Geoffrey and those of William Brewer; they

came to blows, and Brewer's chief “sergeant” was slain by the

hand of Geoffrey himself. Geoffrey, fearing the wrath of the king,

whom he knew to be jealous of his father's power and wealth, fled

to his wife's father, who went to intercede for him with the king;

John, however, “jura les dens Diu que non auroit (merchi), ains le

feroit pendre, se ille pooit tenir.” Robert in return swore “Par

Corpus Domini, non ferés I ains en verriés ii. m. hiaumes laciés en

vostre tierre, que chil fust pendus qui ma fille a.” At last John

promised a “day” for agreement between himself and Geoffrey at

Nottingham, intending to seize him at his coming; but Robert,

“ki le roi connissoit à moult gaignart,” came with his son-in-law,

and with five hundred knights at his back. The king then proposed

another “day,” and the same thing happened a second time.

Then John began to plot vengeance upon Robert; he sent secret

orders to “ses bourgois de Londres, qui se faisoient apelier baron,”

to pull down Castle Baynard; and they, not daring to disobey him,

did as they were bid. Robert, knowing very well that they had

acted on an order from the king, fled over sea with his wife and

children. On reaching the Continent “il fist a entendre par tout

que lirois Jehans voloit sa fille aisnée, qui feme estoit Joffroi de

Mandeville, avoir à force à amie, et por chou que il ne le vaut

soufrir, l’avoit il chacié de sa tierre et tout le sien tolut.” This


was the tale which he also told to King Philip of France, at whose

court he—after staying some time at Arras—presented himself just

as Philip was preparing to invade England. When the invasion

had been checked by John's submission to Pandulf and Pandulf's

prohibition to Philip, Robert went to “Pandoufle le clerc” and to

him told another tale: “li dist que il s'estoit partis d'Engletierre

por le roi qui escumeniiés estoit, car il ne voloit pas estre en la

compaignie des escumeniiés; et por chou li avoit li rois toute sa

terre tolue”; wherefore he begged Pandulf, now that the king was

excommunicate no longer, to make peace for him and get him

back his land, which Pandulf accordingly did (Hist, des Ducs, pp.

I 15-25).

Here, at any rate, it is clear that the date of the quarrel cannot

have been later than the spring of 1213; perhaps, as we are not

told how long Robert stayed in Flanders before going to France, it

might be some months earlier. This agrees with the date assigned

to Robert's flight from England by the Barnwell annalist, Ralph of

Coggeshall, and Roger of Wendover, all of whom place it in the

latter part of 1212 (see below, p. 292). The cause of the flight,

however, still remains doubtful. It will be observed that the writer

of the Histoire des Ducs, speaking in his own person, makes the

quarrel between John and Robert arise out of John's enmity to

Robert's son-in-law, Geoffrey de Mandeville, and also makes that

enmity originate in the king's jealousy of Geoffrey's father (the

Justiciar), without a word about Geoffrey's wife; but that he

represents Robert Fitz-Walter as having given to different

persons two different accounts of the matter, both of which are

quite distinct not only from the account given by the writer him-

self, but also from each other. To the third of these three accounts

—the assertion which Robert is said to have made to Pandulf, that

he left England because he would not keep company with an ex-

communicate sovereign—it is hardly possible for any one who has

read the story of the years of interdict to attach any weight.

Robert's appeal to Pandulf, moreover, is chronologically out of

place; it is represented as having been made after John's agree-

ment with Pandulf, whereas in reality the restoration of Robert

Fitz-Walter, and also of Eustace de Vesci, was one of the conditions

of that agreement. The statement which Robert is said to have

made “everywhere,” on the other hand, is only too likely to be true,

and may well contain the true explanation of John's designs against

the husband of Fitz-Walter's daughter; while none of the three

versions is incompatible with either of the others. Still the fact

remains that three different versions are thus given—two on the

alleged authority of Robert Fitz-Walter, one on his own authority—

by a writer who was strictly contemporary, and who ranks as one




of the best, and certainly the most impartial, of our informants on

the closing years of John's reign; and this fact leaves a somewhat

sinister impression as to the opinion which that writer, at least,

entertained of the truthfulness of the “first champion of English

liberty.”

The main facts which can be gathered from other sources as to

Robert Fitz-Walter's relations with the king are these. In 12 of he

and Saher de Quincy were jointly charged by John with the defence

of the castle of Vaudreuil. They surrendered the place to Philip

Augustus under circumstances so exceptionally disgraceful that

Philip himself felt constrained to make an example of them as

cowards and traitors of too deep a dye to be left unpunished, and

flung them into prison at Compiègne, whence they were only

released on payment of a heavy ransom (R. Wend. iii. 172 ; R.

Coggeshall, pp. 143, 144). “Ex quare,” adds Ralf of Coggeshall,

“facti sunt in derisum et in opprobrium omni populo utriusque

regni, canticum eorum tota die, ac generositatis suae maculaverunt

gloriam ” (cf. Hist, des Ducs, p. 97). Alone, the sovereign whom

they had betrayed sought to shield their reputation at the risk of

his own. Of course he acted from a motive of self-interest. As

neither Robert nor Saher held any lands in Normandy, their money

was to Philip more useful than their personal adhesion could have

been. But for John the friendship of two barons of such import-

ance in England was worth buying back, and he endeavoured to

secure it by treating them with an exaggerated generosity which

was evidently designed to impress them by its contrast with Philip's

severity; he issued (July 5, 1203) letters patent declaring that they

had surrendered Vaudreuil under a warrant from himself, and

ordering that neither they nor its garrison should be made to suffer

for their act (Rot. Pat vol. i. p. 31). Fitz-Walter therefore came

back in peace to his English possessions. Like Eustace de Vesci,

he joined the host which John gathered for a Welsh war in 1212 ;

like Eustace, too, he withdrew from it secretly on learning that John

had received a warning of treason in its ranks (Ann. Waverl. a. 1212);

and like Eustace, again, he did not come when summoned to make

his “purgation ” with the other barons, but, as has been already

seen, fled the country instead (W. Coventry, ii. 207; R. Coggeshall,

p. 165; R. Wendover, iii. 240). The Barnwell annalist (W. Coventry,

1.c.) dates the demolition of Castle Baynard, and of Robert's other

castles, after his flight; the Annals of Dunstable place the destruc-

tion of Castle Baynard a year earlier, viz. in 1211.

There remains the question: What was the reason for the special

mention of Eustace de Vesci and Robert Fitz-Walter in the terms of

reconciliation between the Pope and John P. At first glance it

seems natural to infer that there must have been some peculiar


:

injustice in John's outlawry of these two men, to make their restora-

tion a matter for intervention on the part of the Pope. But, as has

been seen, all the ascertained facts of the case point the opposite

way. If indeed Fitz-Walter's alleged assertion to Pandulf, that he

had fled on account of the king's excommunication, were true, he

would naturally be among the “laicis ad hoc negotium contin-

gentibus” (R. Wendover, iii. 248), while the fact that the rest of

these lay sufferers seem to have been all of lower rank might possibly

account for his being specially mentioned by name. But it was not

true; and with regard to De Vesci no such assertion is mentioned.

Nevertheless, it is extremely probable that both Fitz-Walter and De

Vesci may have contrived to represent to the Pope or his com-

missioner the cause of their exile in the way in which Fitz-Walter is

described as representing his own case to Pandulf; and neither

Pandulf nor Innocent could have at his command the means of

knowing what all the evidence now available goes to show—that

these two men had fled their country and left their property to fall

into the king's hand, not for conscience's sake, but because their

consciences accused them of treason.



