And as it had been under discussion between ourself and the

count of La Marche that we should give our daughter Joan

in marriage to his son, we did so grant it to him, although

the king of France asked for her for his own son ; but that

demand was a trick; for we remembered how our niece was

given to the French king's son Louis, and what was the

May 16

May 17

May 18

May 20

May 25


i.

I2 I4

consequence of that; but may God grant us more profit

from this marriage than we have had from that one ! And

now,” ends the king with a burst of eager anticipation, “by

God's grace there is given us an opportunity to carry our

attack upon our chief enemy, the king of France, beyond

the limits of Poitou.””

He made good use of his opportunity. Louis had

apparently retired from Montcontour at his approach, for we

hear nothing of any encounter between them, and within

twenty-four hours of his departure from Parthenay John was

at Cissé, only a few miles from Poitiers. On Poitiers he

made no attempt, but passed on into Berry, into which he

penetrated as far north as Chezelles (June 7). Four days

later he was at Ancenis, on the border of Anjou and

Britanny. The next week was spent in feeling his way

towards Angers. From Ancenis, on June 12, he moved up

the Loire to St. Florent and Rochefort,” thus securing the

approach to the city from the west and south. Then, by a

master stroke of audacity, he seems to have suddenly made

a rapid march westward again, to draw up his forces on

June 13 * within sight of Nantes. The citizens and the

French garrison came forth to meet him at the bridge

outside the city; in the fight which ensued John's troops

were completely victorious, and twenty French knights were

taken prisoners, among them a cousin of the French king,

the eldest son of Count Robert of Dreux whose second son,

Peter, was now recognized by the French as “count of

Britanny” in right of his wife Alice, the half-sister of Arthur

and Eleanor.” Whether this victory struck terror into the

men of Angers, and whether they opened their gates to the

victor in consequence, we cannot tell; we only know that on

June 17 and 18 John was once more in the original capital

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 280, 281. The treaty with the Lusignans is in

Rot. Chart. p. 197 b ; it has no date. * Itin. a. 16.

* M. Petit-Dutaillis (Hist, de Louis VIII. p. 48) thinks this affair at Nantes

occurred “dans les premiers jours de juin.” The only blank days in John's

itinerary during this month are June 2-4, 8, 9 and 13. From the relative

positions of the places where he was on the other days, I cannot but think that

the 13th is the most likely date.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 285, 286. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 169; W.

Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 172; and Hist, des Ducs, p. 143.


of his forefathers." But once more he was compelled by the

untrustworthiness of his followers to turn his back upon it,

and this time for ever.

The castles in the ‘immediate neighbourhood of Angers

were mostly in the hands of John or his friends; there was,

however, one important exception—La Roche-au-Moine,”

where William des Roches, now seneschal of Anjou for

Philip Augustus, had lately built a fortress to protect the

road between Angers and Nantes against the garrison of

Rochefort, whose commandant was a partisan of John.” To

La Roche-au-Moine John laid siege with all his forces on

June 19. The siege had lasted a fortnight* when Louis

advanced from Chinon to relieve the place, then on the verge

of surrender. At the tidings of his approach John sent out

scouts to ascertain the strength of the enemy; they returned

with the assurance that the English king had an over-

whelming advantage in numbers, and was certain to be

victorious if he engaged the French in a pitched battle.

John was eager for the fight;" so, according to the French

historiographer-royal, was Louis, who sent to his rival a

public challenge, which John as publicly accepted.” But

the “wonted treachery.”—as an exasperated English writer

calls it—of the Poitevins overthrew his hopes. According

to one account, “the barons of Poitou, disdaining to follow

the king, said that they were not ready for a fight in the

open field.” According to the French version of the story,

the immediate author of John's discomfiture was the veteran

turncoat Almeric of Thouars, who, it seems, addressed John

in a most insulting manner, mocking at his eagerness for

battle, insinuating that it was mere boastfulness which the

king would never carry out in act, and then made it im-

possible for him to do so, by withdrawing himself and all his

! Itin. a. 16. -

* M. Petit-Dutaillis (Louis VIII. p. 49) remarks that the modern post-office

spelling, “La Roche-aux-Moines,” is wrong, the Latin form being “Rupes

Monachi,” not “Monachorum.”

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 178.

* Dates from Itin. a. 16. -

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 286.

° W. Armor. Philipp. l. x. vv. 202-18.

7 R. Wendover, l.c.

I2 I4


I2 I4

followers from the host.” Whichever version be the correct

one, the consequences were inevitable; John could not risk

an encounter with Louis after such a revelation of treason

in his own ranks. In rage and grief he broke up the siege,

and hurried away to the south side of the Loire.”

His retreat, however, implied no abandonment of the

design which had brought him across the sea. His expedi-

tion was only a part of the great combination whereby he

hoped to bring Philip Augustus to ruin. Through long

years of diplomacy he had knit together a league which

included all the powers on the northern and eastern borders

of France, and, now that it was at last ready for united

action, threatened the very existence of the French monarchy.

While John was scouring the country between the Loire and

the Dordogne, a formidable host was gathering in Flanders.

Earl William of Salisbury was there with a picked band of

Englishmen; the Flemish troops under Hugh de Boves who

had been serving John as mercenaries in England had been

recalled to swell the muster in their native land ; Count

Reginald of Boulogne and Count William of Holland had

joined their forces to those of Ferrand; all alike were

soldiers of the king of England, receiving his pay through

William of Salisbury, who as John's representative was

Marshal of the whole host. While that host ravaged

Ponthieu, the dukes of Brabant and Louvain “with all their

might” attacked the north-eastern extremity of the French

border, in concert with a certain German count “whom the

French called Pelu.” The Emperor Otto was in full

sympathy with the allies, helping them indirectly by his

“counsel and favour”; at last, when the eastern and western

divisions of the composite host had effected a junction, he

himself came with a small body of knights to join their

ranks.”

So skilfully and secretly had the combination been

planned that Philip was quite unprepared to meet it. He

had sent the greater part of his available forces southward

July 2

1 W. Armor. Philipp. 1. x, vv. 243-65.

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 179. Cf. Itin. a. 16.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 287, and M. Paris, Hist, Angl. vol. ii. p. 150.


under Louis to check the progress of John. For the

moment this had been achieved, not so much by Louis as

by the Poitevin traitors. But the check was only moment-

ary; Louis made no attempt to follow John across the

Loire; and John was already taking steps to fill the places

of the Poitevin deserters with more trustworthy troops. On

July 9 he wrote from La Rochelle to “all his faithful men."

in England, telling them that he was safe and prosperous,

thanking them for the support which they had given him

hitherto, and desiring that all those who had not accom-

panied him over sea would come to his aid now, unless

their presence at home was specially required by his repre-

sentatives in the government. “And if,” he added, “any

one of you should think that we have been displeased with

him, his surest way to set that matter right is by coming at

our call.” France was caught between two fires. The

most imminent danger was from the allies who were ready

to pour into the realm from the north and east; but Philip,

though conscious that the troops which he had at hand

were insufficient to cope with this danger, dared not recall

Louis while John was still threatening attack from the

south. Gathering courage from the extremity of the peril,

the French king hastily collected what forces he could—

counts, barons, knights, men-at-arms, horse and foot, with

the communes of the towns and villages—bade the bishops

and clergy, monks and nuns, offer up masses, prayers and

alms for the safety of the realm, and marched boldly against

the invaders. He met them at the bridge of Bouvines on

Sunday, July 27, and routed them completely. Hugh de

Boves fled ; Otto fled likewise, or was driven from the field ;

the earl of Salisbury, the counts of Flanders and Boulogne

and the German count were made prisoners, together with

Otto's seneschal and a crowd of other knights. The great

coalition which had cost John so many years of diplomacy

and such vast sums of money to build up was shivered into

fragments at a single blow.”

1 Rot. Pat. p. 118 b.

2 Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 288-91 ; M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p.

151 ; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. cc. 181-97; R. Coggeshall, p. 169 (wrong

date), and W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 216.

I214


I2 I4

Philip re-entered Paris in triumph with his captives,"

and then marched southward to unite his victorious army

with that of his son.” Against the whole military forces of

France, thus concentrated and in their present mood of

exalted patriotism and enthusiastic loyalty, John was still

eager to continue the war; in the middle of August Peter

des Roches was trying to secure the fulfilment of an order

from the king for three hundred Welshmen to join him

over sea before the end of the month.” But another

power stepped in to check the hostilities between the kings.

Innocent III. was planning a new crusade, and the first

necessity for his purpose was the restoration of peace in

Europe. As early as April 22 he had urged both the

kings, on pain of ecclesiastical censures, to cease from the

strife which was hindering the work to be done in the Holy

Land and imperilling the safety of Christendom, and to

make at least a truce till after the meeting of a general

council,” the date of which he had already fixed for All

Saints' Day 1215.” The English-born cardinal who was

now legate in France, Robert Curson, seems to have urged

the barons who were with John to persuade him to agree to

a truce for nine days, with a view to arranging a personal

interview between John and Philip." The French king had

advanced as far as Loudun, where he received the sub-

mission of Almeric of Thouars and several other Poitevin

barons. John was some seventeen miles off, at Parthenay,

“having,” says Philip's biographer, “no place to flee unto,

and not daring either to stay where he was, or to offer

battle.” To offer battle at that moment, with the legate

and the barons all urgent for peace, would indeed have been

madness; so on August 30 John signified his assent to a

cessation of hostilities for a fortnight from the next day, if

the legate would ensure its observance on the French side.”

On September 3 John withdrew to Saint-Maixent; thence

1 M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 151.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 17o ; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 216.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 210 b. * Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 139.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 167. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 214.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 124. * W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 204.

* Foedera, l.c.




he went on the 9th to Niort; on the 12th he returned to

Parthenay," and there, on the 13th, he, by letters patent,

pledged himself to ratify whatever terms nine envoys, whom

he named, should agree upon with Philip.”

These envoys were supported by the legate in person ;

“and,” says William the Breton, “although the high-souled

King Philip, having in his army two thousand knights and

more, besides a multitude of other troops, could easily have

seized the whole land and the person of the king of Eng-

land, yet with his wonted benignity he granted a truce.””

In England Philip was reported to have yielded either to

the authority of the Pope, or to the attraction of sixty

thousand marks offered to him by John.” We may doubt

whether either of these motives, or all of them united,

would have proved effectual, if the complete overthrow and

capture of his rival had really been as easy as the Breton

court-historian imagined. The truce was dated from Sep-

tember 18, and was to last for five years from the next

Easter, 1215. The conditions were that each party should

retain its prisoners; that the oath sworn to Philip by the

towns of Flanders and Hainaut should be recognized as

valid; that Philip, his men, and his adherents should hold

throughout the time of the truce whatever they held on the

day of its commencement; and that any disputes which

might arise should be settled at certain appointed places by

the sworn arbitrators of the truce, who were eight in number,

each of the kings being represented by two laymen, an

abbot and a secular priest. The maltöte or tax levied by

each king on the adherents of his rival was to be given up

if John, its originator, consented to renounce it; if not,

Philip claimed the right to continue it likewise. Frederic

of Sicily was to be included in the truce as an ally of

Philip, and Otto as a friend of John, if they chose to be so

included; if otherwise, then Philip was to be at liberty to

assist Frederic and John to assist Otto, within the boundaries

of the empire, without violating the peace between them-

selves.

1 Itin. a. I6. * Rot. Pat. p. 140 b.

3 W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 204. * R. Coggeshall, p. 170.

I2 I4


1214

Philip's proclamation of the truce was issued on Sep-

tember 18 from Chinon." John seems to have been then

still at Parthenay. The terms secured to him the very

utmost that he could possibly hope to attain, now that he

was deprived of the co-operation of his allies in the north.

He had in fact, as an English writer says, “completed what

he had to do over sea,”* as well as his share of the work

could be completed when that work as a whole was ruined

by the disaster of Bouvines. On September 21 he was

again at Niort, on the 30th at Saintes, and at some date

between October 2 and 13 he sailed from La Rochelle to

England.”

To all outward seeming England was at peace. The

Pope's letter containing his decision as to the conditions on

which the interdict was to be withdrawn had reached John

on March 4, at the siege of Milécu, and he had at once sent

it on to Peter des Roches for delivery to the legate Nicolas,”

whom he had, before leaving England, empowered to settle

the matter in conjunction with William the Marshal. A

council was summoned at S. Paul's; the Pope's decision

was communicated to the assembled prelates and barons,

and the legate asked for an account of the sums already paid

by the Crown in connexion with the interdict, that he might

know how much was still wanting to complete the forty

thousand marks which the Pope had fixed as the total of

the indemnity. When this was ascertained, it was agreed

that the remainder—thirteen thousand marks—should stand

over on the security of the bishops of Winchester and

Norwich and of the king himself.” This last John gave by

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 125. There is a mutilated version of this document

in R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 292, 293.

* “Expletis agendis suis in partibus transmarinis, rediit in Angliam,” R.

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 293.

* Itin. a. 16; for the last date see Memorials of S. Bamund’s, vol. ii.

p. 92.

* Rot. Pat. p. 111 b.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 283, 284. The terms are stated in a very con-

fused way, both in the Pope's letter (given l.c.; also in Rot. Chart. pp. 208, 209),

in a letter of Earl William of Ferrars (Rot. Pat. p. 139; Ferrars was one of

those who swore as sureties for the king), and in that of John himself (Rot.

Chart. p. 199); but a comparison of the three documents with Roger's own

account of the matter makes it tolerably clear that Nicolas was authorized to




letters patent issued from Angers on June 17*; and as soon

as these letters reached England, Nicolas solemnly withdrew

the interdict.”

Serious grievances connected with it, however, still

remained. A special tax seems to have been levied through-

out the realm, under the title of “aid for the relaxation of

the interdict” “–either to pay the remainder of the indemnity

to the bishops or to furnish the tribute due to Rome. No

indemnification was provided for the losses of any one except

the bishops; the multitude of lower clergy, the monks, nuns

and lay people of both sexes whose property had been

seized or damaged “on occasion of the interdict” were

ignored in the settlement. When they applied to the legate

for redress, he told them that he had no instructions to deal

with their case, but that they might appeal to the Pope.*

For the great majority of individual victims, ruined as they

were, such an appeal was impracticable. The greater

religious houses might have been able to attempt it; but

regulars and seculars alike were apparently in too much

dread of the king to attempt anything at all. Within two

months after his return to England John put forth a demand

to the clergy of at least one diocese, and to several religious

houses, in the shape of a courteous request that they would

waive all claim to the return of “those things which you

gave to us in the time of the interdict, and which are now

described as having been taken from you.” A form of

renunciation or quit-claim was issued, evidently intended for

distribution throughout the country, to be signed by the

parties concerned." John in fact seems to have again asked

all the English clergy, as he had asked them two years

before, for a quit-claim on the plea that their contributions

raise the interdict as soon as he had obtained security for the payment of twelve

thousand marks a year, in half-yearly instalments, till the total of forty thousand

should be complete.

* Rot. Chart. p. 199.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 284, makes the date June 29; W. Coventry,

vol. ii. p. 217, R. Coggeshall, p. 169, and Ann. Waverl. a. 1214, make it

uly 2.

J 3. Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 208, 208b, 209.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 284, 285.

* Rot. Pat. pp. 124, 14ob, 141.

I214

June-July




I2 I4

had been voluntary; and though we have no statement of

the result, there seems no reason to doubt that in 1214, as

in 1212, the audacious demand was complied with. º

The weakness of the clergy was partly owing to the fact

that they were disappointed in their hopes of finding a

champion in the legate. At his coming he had been hailed

as a reformer both in Church and State'; but the year

I 214 had scarcely begun when Archbishop Stephen, after

consultation with his suffragans,” addressed to him a solemn

protest, threatening to appeal against him to the Pope unless

he desisted from instituting prelates to vacant churches,

contrary to the rights of the metropolitan. Nicolas dis-

regarded the protest, and commissioned Pandulf—who had

just gone back to Rome—to defend him against the appeal.”

For nine months Nicolas continued to exercise his influence

as he chose, without remonstrance from the Pope. He was

an instrument which could not be dispensed with until its

special work—the removal of the interdict—was done;

moreover, the king was on the Continent, and in the doubtful

state of political affairs it would scarcely have been prudent,

during his absence, for Innocent to withdraw his own

representative from England. No sooner, however, had

John returned than Nicolas was summoned back to Rome.*

It is clear that Stephen's protest and appeal had been really

directed not merely against legatine intrusion into his own

metropolitical rights, but also, and chiefly, against the legate's

interpretation of the papal letter concerning elections to

churches, and his action in making himself the medium

of royal interference in this matter." Stephen indeed seems

to have looked upon Nicolas as the chief obstacle to a

settlement, between himself and the king, of this question of

elections; and a formal settlement, wholly in the Church's

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 215.

* At Dunstable, “after the octave of Epiphany,” R. Wendover, vol. iii.

p. 278.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 278, 279, says that Nicolas, with the king's

assent, sent Pandulf specially to plead for him at Rome against the archbishop;

but Pandulf's approaching departure over sea “in nuncium nostrum” was

announced by John on January 4 (Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 141), ten days at least

before Stephen's appeal was made or even threatened.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 278, 279, and R. Coggeshall, p. 170.


favour, was in fact made as soon as king and archbishop

were once more face to face. On November 21 John published

a grant of free and canonical election to all the churches in

his realm." This grant, like every other acknowledgement

made by the Crown, before or since, of the Church's right

on this point, was of course destined never to be anything

but a dead letter. But it served John's purpose. It saved

him from a fresh quarrel with the Church at a moment

when the struggle with the barons in which he had been

engaged almost ever since his accession to the Crown had

entered upon a new phase and assumed a new character

which made it, alike for them and for him, a matter of life

and death.

1 Statutes of the Realm, Charters of Liberties, p. 5. A copy of this grant,

with the date January 15, is printed in Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. pp. 126-7.

I2 I4


CHAPTER VI

JOHN AND THE BARONS

1214–1215

Ki ore vaurroit oir l'ocoison de la guerre dont lirois Jehans moru deshiretés

de la plus grant partie d’Engletierre, bien le poroit oir en cest escrit.

Aist, des Ducs de Normandie, p. 145.

Intervenientibus itaque archiepiscopo Cantuariensi cum pluribus coepiscopis

et baronibus nonnullis, quasi pax inter regem et barones formata est.

R. COGGESHALL, p. 172.

ON May 26, 12 14, John had issued writs for the collection

of a scutage of three marks per fee from all tenants-in-chief,

royal demesnes, vacant bishoprics, lands in royal wardship,

and escheats, except those fees which were personally repre-

sented in the army in Poitou ; on these the scutage was, as

usual, to be remitted by royal warrant." Those northern

barons who had refused to serve now refused to pay. They

adhered to their contention that they were by their tenure

exempt from the obligation to foreign service, and they

argued that, in consequence, they were also exempt from

the obligation to payment in substitution for such service.”

Whether they claimed this double exemption as a privilege

peculiar to themselves, or as common to the whole baronage,

is not quite clear. In either case the claim would have

been difficult, if not impossible, to prove. There is nothing

to indicate that the fiefs in northern England had been

originally granted on different conditions from those in the

south. On the other hand, there are, indeed, some slight

indications of the possible existence in some quarters, in the

I214

1 Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 166 b. * W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 217.

2 IO


days of both Richard and Henry, of a theory that the obliga-

tion to foreign service—and therefore to payment of scutage

for a foreign war—did not form part of the regular obliga-

tions of military tenure; in other words, that tenants-in-

chivalry were not legally bound to serve in, or to pay for,

any war save one of defence. But no general attempt had

ever been made even to formulate such a theory, far less to

carry it out to its logical consequences; and it is obvious

that those consequences would have made it practically im-

possible for the kings of England to carry on any continental

warfare at all. When John in reply to the northern recal-

citrants insisted that “it always used to be so done"—that

is, foreign service had been rendered or scutage paid in its

stead—in his father's and brother's days," he was unquestion-

ably right; and he might have added that it had also been

so done, over and over again, in the early years of his own

reign. The protest of the northern barons seems to have

been made to him in a personal meeting very soon after his

return to England; we are told that “the matter would

have gone further, had it not been checked by the presence

of the legate.” It seems indeed to have gone further not-

withstanding that obstacle, for the same chronicler adds:

“There was brought forth a certain charter of liberties given

to the English by Henry I., which the said barons asked the

king to confirm.””

If we may believe a report which was current a few

years later, this demand had been first suggested to the

barons, more than a year before, by Archbishop Stephen of

Canterbury. On August 25, 12 13 ; he had gathered the

bishops, abbots and other ecclesiastical dignitaries, with

some of the lay magnates, around him in S. Paul's cathedral

that they might receive his instructions concerning a partial

relaxation of the interdict, which he was empowered to

grant, pending the arrival of the legate. It was said “that

he had afterwards called aside the lay members of the

assembly to a secret meeting in which he laid before them

a yet weightier matter. “Ye have heard”—thus he was

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 217. * Ib. p. 218.

* “Ut fama refert,” R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 263.

I2 I4

I213


1213

reported to have addressed them—“how, when I absolved

the king at Winchester, I made him swear to put down bad

laws and enforce throughout his realm the good laws of

Edward. Now, there has been found also a certain charter

of King Henry I. by which, if ye will, ye may recall to their

former estate the liberties which ye have so long lost”:—

and he caused the document in question—the coronation-

charter of Henry I.--to be read aloud before them. “And

when this charter had been read through and interpreted to

the barons, they rejoiced with very great joy, and all swore

in the archbishop's presence that when they saw a fitting

time they would fight for those liberties, if it were needful,

even unto death; the archbishop, too, promised them his

most faithful help to the utmost of his power. And, a con-

federacy being thus made between them, the conference was

dissolved.” This story is given by Roger of Wendover

only as a rumour; but whether the rumour were literally

true or not, it was at any rate founded upon a fact: the

fact that the movement which was to result in the Great

Charter owed its true impulse to the patriotism, as it owed

its success to the statesmanship, not of any of the barons,

but of Stephen Langton.

During eight months out of the fourteen which elapsed

between the archbishop's return and that of the king, the

administration of government was in the hands of Peter des

Roches, and he ruled the country with a rod of iron.” But

Peter's vice-regal tyranny was only the final outcome of a

state of things which had been growing worse from year to

year for more than a quarter of a century. England in the

sixteenth year of King John was suffering under an accumu-

lation of grievances consisting, as Ralph of Coggeshall truly

says, of all “the evil customs which the king's father and

brother had raised up for the oppression of the Church and

realm, together with the abuses which the king himself had

added thereto.”* No doubt these last formed the worst

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 263-6.

* Ann. Waver!. a. 1214; “potestate sua non bene utens, iram baronum

converti fecerat contra regem.”

* R. Coggeshall, p. 170.

A


part of the evil, and it was the addition of them that gave

such an increase of bitterness to all the rest. The obliga-

tion laid upon all men to attend the Forest courts, when

summoned, whether subject to their jurisdiction or not, had

been a hardship ever since it was imposed by Henry II. in

I 184; the working of the Forest laws had been a source

of suffering from a period much earlier still ; but the area of

the hardship and the suffering was rendered more extensive

by the new afforestations made by John. The inconvenience

caused by the old practice of making common pleas “follow

the king”—that is, of holding trials of civil causes only

before the justices who accompanied the king, wheresoever

he might be—had been felt in Henry's time, and Henry had

tried to remedy it by setting up a permanent bench of

justices in a...fixed place to deal with such causes. But the

right retained by the sovereign of calling up suits from this

tribunal to his own presence was exercised by John to a

degree which his restless and erratic movements—almost

more restless and erratic than those of his father—seem to

have rendered extremely vexatious to litigants.” The

precise limits of the king's rights over his tenants-in-chief

as to military service, scutage, control over their castles,

and such-like matters, had been more or less in dispute

throughout the two preceding reigns; but the bitterness of

such disputes was intensified by John's personal dealings

with his barons, his subtle contrivances for stealing from

them their rights over their own tenants and their own

lands, his interference with their domestic life by his con-

tinual demands for hostages, and, above all, in many cases,

by a desecration of their homes which blood alone could

expiate.

Again, the corrupt administration of the sheriffs had

been matter of complaint under Henry; but it was far

worse under John ; for whereas Henry, and after him

Hubert Walter acting for Richard, had endeavoured by

various means to check the independent action and curtail

the powers of the sheriffs, now the king himself was almost

* Articles of the Barons, 1215 cc. 39, 47.

* Ib. c. 8,

I2I4


I2 I4

openly in league with those officers, and their usurpations

and extortions were not merely condoned, but encouraged,

if not even directly instigated, by him for his own interest.

Owing to the rise in the value of land and a variety of other

causes, the sheriffs' annual receipts had for many years past

been generally in considerable excess of the sum—fixed

under the Norman kings on the basis of the Domesday

Survey—for which they were accountable to the royal

treasury as ferm of the shire. Whatever they received

beyond this fixed sum seems to have been originally, in

theory at least, their own profit. But a share of it was

naturally soon claimed by the Crown; and this was done,

not by putting the ferm at a higher figure, but by charging

the sheriff with an additional lump sum under the title of

crementum, or, in John's time, proficuum." Whatever pro-

portion the increment thus paid to the Crown may have

borne to the actual receipts of the sheriffs, it is clear that

under a sovereign of John's character an arrangement which

made king and sheriff partners in gain would make them

also partners in extortion. The partnership began when the

sheriff entered upon his office; he was appointed to it by

the king alone, he held it during the king's pleasure; John

had no trouble in finding sheriffs after his own heart. As

the improvement of the royal demesnes and the legitimate

proceeds of royal jurisdiction were inadequate to produce

increment on a scale such as is shown in some of the Pipe

Rolls of the reign, these men fleeced the people of their

shire by every means they could devise, for the joint profit

of the king and themselves; and the king connived at and

abetted every possible usurpation of the sheriffs, that they

might wring out of the shire a larger amount of money for

him. They set at nought the restrictions which John's pre-

decessors had placed upon their action. They took upon

* Of the value to which these profits had risen some idea may be gathered

from the fact that a proftcuum of £336:18:8 was accounted for as due to the

Treasury in 1205 by the sheriff of Staffordshire and Shropshire, of which two

counties the united ferm was £4.13:12:4, Salt Archaeol. Soc. Publications, vol.

ii. pp. 129, 133. It must, however, be added that this proftcuum was reduced

next year to £266 : 13:4, and went down further year by year, till in 1212 it

was only about £155: I Is., ii. pp. 136, 138, 142, 145, 147, 151, 159. After

that year the Pipe Rolls are in confusion till 1218.


themselves to keep the pleas of the Crown, without reference

to the coroners to whom that duty had been specially

intrusted under Richard." They accused men of offences

and sent them to the ordeal without more ado, in defiance

of Henry's ordinance limiting the employment of that mode

of trial to cases in which the charge was made on the pre-

sentment of a sworn jury.” The corrupt and extortionate

rule of the sheriffs had been strongly condemned by the

bishops and magnates in the king's name at the council at

S. Albans in August 1213, and it is said that after the

coming of the legate some attempt was made to check these

abuses by removing the most glaring offenders from office;”

but a mere change of officers was of little avail; the fault

lay not only in the persons who worked the system, but also

in the system itself; and the evil extended far beyond the

sphere of the sheriffs' activity.

The whole judicial administration of the realm was

corrupt. There was very distinctly one law for the rich and

another for the poor." Justice was sold, delayed, or refused

altogether, at the king's will.” Proceedings for which the

presence of only the parties concerned in the suit, and a

certain number of jurors, was legally necessary, were made a

pretext for summoning other persons," evidently for the sake

of exacting fines from them if they failed to attend, and

were protracted" so as to make attendance as vexatious

as possible, that there might be the more defaulters and the

more fines. The course of justice was subjected to constant

interference through the summary evocation of causes from

the lower courts to that of the king, at the instance of any

suitor who could afford to pay for the writ of “praecipe.”

whereby the sheriff was authorized to effect the transfer.”

Fines were imposed without regard either to the scale of the

offence or the offender's means of paying, so that men of all

classes were reduced by them to ruin, being unable to make

up the required sum except by selling their sole means of

livelihood—the free yeoman his tenement, the villein his

* Art. Bar. c. 14. 2 Ib. c. 28.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 214, 215. * Art. Bar. c. 26.

* Ib. c. 30. 6 Ib. c. 8. 7 Ib. c. 13. * Ib. c. 24.

I2 I4




I2 I4

cart, the merchant his stock in trade; * clerks were amerced

to the full value not only of any lay tenement which they

possessed, but also of their ecclesiastical benefices.” Henry's

Assize had given to the Crown only the chattels of a con-

victed felon ; but now the Crown took his land also, without

compensation to the mesne lord to whom it ought to have

reverted.”

The exactions and usurpations of the Crown were of

the most various kinds, and affected every class of society.

Reliefs of arbitrary and unreasonable amount were again,

as in the Red King's days, exacted from tenants-in-chief on

succession to their estates.” Sub-tenants holding land which

formed part of an escheated honour were made to pay relief

not as other sub-tenants paid to their immediate lord, but as

if they held in chief of the Crown.” The widows of tenants-

in-chief could not obtain the dowry to which they were

legally entitled without payment to the king for its assign-

ment," and were forced into second marriages against their

will.” The wardship and marriage of minor heirs was given,

or sold, by the king to his friends without regard to the

honesty or dishonesty of the guardian and the interests of

the minor and his family.” By an ingenious piece of in-

tentional confusion the Crown arrogated to itself the right

of wardship in cases where it had no such right. If a man

held land of the Crown by a non-feudal tenure, and also

held other land under another lord by knight-service, the

distinction between his holding in chief and his holding in

chivalry was ignored for the king's benefit, and the custody

of all the man's lands was appropriated to the Crown.”

Distraints for debt to the Crown were made in the most

arbitrary way; the king's bailiffs would, if it so pleased

them or their master, seize a debtor's land instead of his

chattels, though the value of these latter sufficed to discharge

his debt; or they would distrain a debtor's sureties, although

he himself was able to pay.” When a freeman died, they

assumed as matter of course that he was in debt to the

* Art. Bar. c. 9. 2 Ib. c. Io. * Ib. c. 22.

* /b. c. 1. * Ib. c. 36. ° Ib. c. 4.

7 Ib. c. 17. * Ib. c. 3. 9 Ib. c. 27. 10 Ib. c. 5.


king, and without inquiring to what amount, they seized his

chattels, to be restored to his executors or next-of-kin only

when the royal claim was satisfied, and not always then."

John, like William Rufus, “would be every man's heir.” If

a man died in debt to the Jews, and leaving an heir under

age, those usurers were suffered to exact interest upon their

debt during the minority of the heir, so that if through the

death of the Jewish creditor the debt should fall into the

king's hand (the Crown being the legal heir of all Jews),

there should be as much for the king as possible; and in

such cases he claimed payment of the uttermost farthing

that was set down in the Jew's account-book, although he

might thereby leave the Christian debtor's widow and

children to starve.” Exorbitant tolls were exacted from

merchants.” Fines were laid upon towns for the making of

bridges, in places where no such obligation had existed in

times past.” Weirs were placed in the rivers that the king

might keep to himself the profits of fishing." Monasteries

not of royal foundation were taken into the king's custody

during vacancy, in defiance of the rights of their founders'

representatives." The king's bailiffs compelled men to give

their corn and other goods for the use of the king or his

servants, their horses and carts for the carriage of burdens

in his service, their wood for the construction of his buildings,

whether the owners were willing or not, and seemingly

without payment." Free men were arrested, imprisoned,

ejected from their lands, even exiled or outlawed, without

legal warrant or fair trial.” Individuals were forbidden to

enter or quit the realm at the mere will of the king.” Some

barons whom he specially favoured, or wanted to propitiate,

received licences to impose arbitrary taxes on their sub-

tenants, without regard to the limits of feudal custom,”

just as the king himself imposed taxes on his subjects

according to his will and pleasure. In a word, the entire

system of government and administration set up under the

Norman kings and developed under Henry and Richard

* Art. Bar. c. 15. * Ib. cc, 34, 35. * Ib. c. 31.

4 Ib. c. I I. * Ib. c. 23. ° Ib. c. 43.

7 Ib. cc. 18, 20. * Ib. c. 29. * Ib. c. 33. 10 Ib. c. 6.

*\

I2 I4

..


had been converted by the ingenuity of John into a most

subtle and effective engine of royal extortion, oppression

and tyranny over all classes of the nation, from earl to

villein. -

The only class which was as yet capable of making any

corporate opposition or protest was the baronage; and

hitherto the discontent of the barons had shown itself only

in the resistance of some of their number to the king's

demands on certain special occasions and in reference to

certain special points which affected them personally as

tenants-in-chief. But there was now one man in England

who looked at the questions at issue between them and the

king from a higher standpoint than theirs, and in whose

eyes those questions were only small parts of a much wider

and deeper question, on the solution of which he had set his

mind from the very hour of his landing in the realm. One

chronicler relates that John's first impulse on hearing of

Archbishop Stephen's arrival in England had been to with-

draw himself to some remote place and put off their meeting

as long as possible, and that he had only been induced to

abandon this intention by the remonstrances of some of the

barons." Whether this particular story be true or not, it

seems plain that John's conduct throughout his quarrel with

the Church was to a great extent dictated by personal dis-

like to the archbishop. This feeling must have been mainly

instinctive ; for the two men had never seen each other till

they met at Winchester on July 20, 12 13. The instinct,

however, was a true one : it was Stephen Langton who was to

give the first impulse to the work which was destined—

though not till long after he had passed away—to make the

rule of such a king as John impossible in England for

eVermore.

The archbishop was determined to be satisfied with

nothing short of a literal fulfilment of the promise on which

he had insisted as a condition of the king's absolution, the

promise that to “all men” their rights should be restored.

He saw that this end could be gained only by the instru-

12.I.4

* Ann. Waverl. a. 1213.


mentality of the barons; he also saw that it could be gained

only by a policy based on clearer and firmer, as well as

broader and nobler, lines than any of them were capable of

designing. They, indeed, had no definite scheme of policy;

nor had they any leader able to furnish them with such a

scheme. The men of highest standing among the magnates,

such as the earls of Salisbury, Chester, Albemarle, Warren,

Cornwall and William the Marshal,—the men of highest

standing among the official class, such as the heads of the

houses of Aubigny, Vipont, De Lucy, Basset, Cantelupe,

Neville, Brewer"—had either gone to the war or paid their

Scutage for it without a murmur, and stood utterly aloof from

the group of “Northerners,” among whom the most con-

spicuous were two barons of secondary rank, Eustace de

Vesci and Robert Fitz-Walter. Both Eustace and Robert

are said to have had just grounds for bitter personal resent-

ment against John ; but Robert Fitz-Walter had twice already

shown himself to be both a traitor and a coward ; and on

the second occasion, in 12 12, Eustace de Vesci had done

the like. The pardon and restoration of both these men in

the following year was a matter of policy, but was not due

to any merits of their own.” It was not under the inspira-

tion and guidance of such men as these that the liberties of

the English people could be won, nor even that the barons

could succeed in their struggle for the privileges, pretended

or real, of their own order. Another guide offered himself

to them in the person of Stephen Langton, and offered to

them at the same time a definite basis of action in the

charter of Henry I. Whether the offer was made at the

meeting in S. Paul's in August 12 13, or at some later date

and in some other way, is of little consequence; it is enough

that antecedent probability and after-history alike justify the

general belief of which Roger of Wendover is the spokes-

man:—that it was Langton who brought to light the charter

of which the very existence seems to have been forgotten,

and it was from him that the barons adopted it as the basis

of their demands.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 300, 301.

* See Note II. at end.

I 214




I214

The step which they took in so doing was weightier than,

probably, they themselves had any idea of. At first glance

the charter seems to have little or no bearing upon the

immediate subject of dispute between them and the king ;

it contains no mention whatever of either scutage or military

service beyond sea. But it does contain a series of clauses

regulating the relations between the tenants-in-chief and the

Crown; and thus it furnished them with a substantial ground

for insisting that all violations of its provisions on the part

of the Crown must be redressed before any further burdens

could be binding upon them. It was even possible for them

to argue that any demands on the king's part other than

those expressly sanctioned in the charter were an encroach-

ment on their privileges as therein defined. For the greater

purpose which Langton had in view, the value of the charter

lay in its opening of the way to wider reforms by the

incidental clauses which bound the tenants-in-chief to

extend to their sub-tenants the same benefits which they

themselves received from the king, and in the comprehensive

sentence which declared the abolition of “all evil customs

whereby the realm was unjustly oppressed.”" The more

thoughtful among the confederate barons may perhaps by

this time have begun to see that, even from a selfish point

of view, they had nothing to lose, and might have something

to gain, by identifying their cause with that of the nation as

a whole. Many of the grievances which touched the lower

classes touched the higher also, though not always in the

same way. Moreover, although the people were as yet

powerless to initiate any corporate action in their own behalf,

their support had saved more than one earlier sovereign in

a struggle against the barons; it might prove no less useful

to the barons in a struggle against the king. But whatever

the barons may have thought about these matters, the king

was statesman enough to see as clearly as the primate how

weighty and far-reaching might be the consequences involved

in the demand for a renewal of the charter. He therefore

postponed its discussion till after Christmas.”

* Charter of Henry I. cc. 2, 4, 1.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 218.




Such is the brief statement of the Barnwell annalist. In

its stead, Roger of Wendover gives us a dramatic scene in

S. Edmund's abbey. “The earls and barons of England,”

he tells us, came together in that sanctuary, “as if for

prayer; but there was something else in the matter, for after

they had held much secret discourse, there was brought forth

in their midst the charter of King Henry I., which the same

barons had received in London, as hath been before said,

from Archbishop Stephen of Canterbury. Then they went

all together to the church of S. Edmund the King and

Martyr, and beginning with the eldest, they swore on the

high altar that if the king sought to evade their demand for

the laws and liberties which that charter contained, they

would make war upon him and withdraw from fealty to

him till he should, by a charter furnished with his seal,

confirm to them all that they demanded. They also agreed

that after Christmas they would go all together to the king,

and ask him for a confirmation of the aforesaid liberties;

and that meanwhile they would so provide themselves with

horses and arms that if the king should seek to break his

oath, they might by seizing his castles compel him to make

satisfaction. And when these things were done they returned

every man to his own home.”"

John was at S. Edmund's on November 4 ; * it is possible

therefore that his meeting with the barons may have been

held there, and that the scene described by Roger may have

taken place after the king's departure. He kept Christmas

at Worcester, and returned to London at the opening of the

new year.” There, at Epiphany, the confederate barons came

to him in a body, “in somewhat showy military array,” and

prayed him “that certain laws and liberties of King Edward,

with other liberties granted to them and to the English

Church and realm, might be confirmed, as they were written

in the charter of King Henry I. and the laws aforesaid ;

moreover they declared that at the time of his absolution at

2

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 293, 294. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 