Pat. p. 6ob), which clearly implies that the eastern half of the “kingdom

of Cork” was then in the king's hands.

* He is last mentioned as being in Dublin on August 24, and he was at

Fishguard on August 26; Itin. a. 12.

* Rot. Pat. pp. 131, 132 b, 151, 181.

* Dict. Mat. Biog. “Lacy, Hugh de (d. 1242).”


---------- - " *-

and the honour of Limerick was never again bestowed 1210

as a whole upon a single grantee. Under these circum-

stances a system of administrative division into counties

placed under sheriffs appointed by the king, or by the

justiciar in his name, might be established without difficulty

in territories where its introduction in earlier years, if ever

attempted, would probably have been rendered ineffectual

by the power of the great barons. The one great baron

who in the autumn of 12 Io still held his ground in the

March–Earl William the Marshal, the lord of Leinster—

had no hesitation in withstanding the king to his face in the

cause of honour and justice; but he was not a man to

throw obstacles in the way of the royal authority when it

was exercised within the sphere of its rights and in the

interest of public order.

On the king's return to Dublin William the Marshal

came to the court. John at once accused him of having

“harboured a traitor” in the person of William de Braose.

The Marshal answered the king as he had answered the

justiciar, and added that if any other man dared to utter

such a charge against him, he was ready to disprove it

there and then. As usual, no one would take up his

challenge; nevertheless, John again required hostages and

pledges for the Marshal's fidelity, and again they were

given at once." Meanwhile, the sheriff of Hereford sent

word that William de Braose was stirring up trouble in

Wales, and urged that he should be outlawed; but the

king ordered that the matter should await his own return

to England. When he was about to sail, Maud de Braose

offered to fine with him for forty thousand marks, and ten

thousand in addition, as amends for having withdrawn from

her former agreement. John accepted these terms; the

fine was signed and sealed, and it was agreed that Maud,

and also, it seems, the other members of her family who

had been captured with her, should remain in custody till

it was paid. John carried his prisoners back with him to

England, put Maud in prison at Bristol, and at her request

gave an audience to her husband, who ratified the fine

1 Hist, de G. le Mar, vv. 14286-372.


which she had made, but fled secretly just before the day

fixed for paying the first instalment. The king asked

Maud what she now proposed to do, and she answered

plainly that she had no intention, and no means, of paying.

Then it was ordered that “the judgement of our realm

should be carried out against William,” and he was out-

lawed." Thus far the king tells his own story, and there

is no reason to doubt its truth. What he does not tell is

the end of the story. He sent Maud and her son to a

dungeon at Windsor, and there starved them to death.”

12 lo

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 108. * See Note I. at end.




CHAPTER V

JOHN AND THE POPE

I2 IO-1214

[Rex] prudenter sane sibi et suis providens in hoc facto, licet id multis

ignominiosum videretur, et enorme servitutis jugum. Cum enim res in arto

esset, et undique timor vehemens, nulla erat via compendiosior imminens

evadendi periculum, nec forsitan alia; quoniam ex quo se in protectione posuit

apostolica, et regna sua beati Petri patrimonium fecit, non erat in orbe Romano

princeps qui in sedis apostolicae injuriam vel illum infestare, vel illa invadere

praesumeret. W. CovenTRY, ii. 21o.

DURING John's absence in Ireland, England had been

disquieted by rumours of a threatened Welsh invasion.

His ministers, however, faced the peril boldly; the justiciar,

the treasurer (Bishop Peter of Winchester), and the earl of

Chester marched into Wales with “a great host” and built

three castles on Welsh soil," and on the king's return the

Welsh “vanished,” as a chronicler says, into their mountains,

“and the land kept silence before him.”* John, however,

was in no mood, now that England, Scotland and Ireland

were all at his feet, to be content with mere silence on the

part of the Welsh princes, and especially of his own son-in-

law, Llywelyn, who, having secured the hand of the king's

daughter and the mastery over the greater part of Wales,

was now openly turning against the power by whose help

he had risen. The case is frankly stated by a Welsh

chronicler: “Llywelyn, son of Jorwerth, made cruel attacks

upon the English; and on that account King John became

enraged, and formed a design of entirely divesting Llywelyn

* Ann. Dunst. a. I2 Io. * W. Coventry, vol ii p. 202.

157

12 Io


2 ”

of his dominion.”’’ The native rivals whom Llywelyn had

forced into submission were always on the watch for a

chance of flinging off the North-Welsh yoke; and when

John assembled his host at Chester, seemingly in the third

week of May 121 1,” he was joined by most of the chieftains

of the south.” At the tidings of his approach, “Llywelyn,”

says the same chronicler, “moved with his forces into the

middle of the country, and his property to the mountain of

Eryri (Snowdon); and the forces of Mona, with their

property, in the same manner. Then the king, with his

army, came to the castle of Dyganwy. And there the

army was in so great a want of provisions that an egg was

sold for a penny halfpenny, and it was a delicious feast

to them to get horseflesh; and on that account the king

returned to England, after disgracefully losing many of his

men and much property.” “

Whatever military “disgrace” there may have been

was speedily wiped out; John had only gone home to

collect fresh supplies and larger forces.” Setting forth again

from Whitchurch in July," “the king”—again it is a Welsh

chronicler who telA the story—“returned to Wales, his mind

being more ...A. his army larger; and he built many"

castles in Gwynedd. And he proceeded over the river

Conway towards the mountain of Eryri, and incited some

of his troops to burn Bangor. And there Robert, bishop

of Bangor, was seized in his church, and was afterwards

ransomed for two hundred hawks.” Llywelyn sent his

wife to make terms for him with her father, and was

12 Io

I2 II

1 Brut y Tywysogion, a. I2 Io.

* The Brut (a. 1210) says that the host assembled at “Caerleon,” and

returned to England “about Whitsuntide.” It places the campaign in 1210,

but this is obviously a year too early. Cf. Ann. Cambr. a. I2 II, and W.

Coventry, vol. ii. p. 203. John was at Chester (i.e. “Caerleon”) on May 16

and 17, 1211, the Tuesday and Wednesday before Whitsunday; Itin. a. 13.

The Itinerary shows that the expedition had not taken place earlier than this;

and from May 17 to August 29 there is a blank.

3 Ann. Cambr. a. 1211. Cf. Brut, a. I2 Io.

* Brut, a. 12 Io.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 203.

6 July 8, R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 235. The Brut, l.c., says he

“returned to Wales about the calends of August.”

7 Fourteen “or more,” according to Ann. Cambr. a. 121 1.


*~

received into the king's peace on delivering up to him a 1211

large number of hostages, paying a heavy indemnity in

cattle and horses, “and consigning also the midland district

to the king for ever. And thereupon all the Welsh princes,

except Rhys and Owain, the sons of Gruffydd, son of

Rhys, made peace with the king; and the king returned

victoriously, and with extreme joy, to England.”.” Of

course the peace was a hollow one, like every other peace

with the Welsh; but for the moment John's success was

complete. “In Ireland, Scotland, and Wales there was no

man who did not obey the nod of the king of England—

a thing which, it is well known, had never happened to

any of his forefathers; and he would have appeared happy

indeed, and successful to the utmost of his desires, had he

not been despoiled of his territories beyond the sea, and

under the ban of the Church.””

To neither of these drawbacks was John altogether

indifferent. He was only biding his time to make a great

effort for the removal of the first; and although the second

appeared, as yet, to have made no difference to his political

position, he was not insensible to the dangers which it

might involve. THe was still playing with both primate and

Pope. In the spring of 12 Io he had made another feint

of renewing negotiations with Stephen Langton, had sent 1210

him a safe-conduct for a conference to be held at Dover,

and had actually gone thither (May 4), ostensibly for the

purpose of meeting him. But the safe-conduct was irregular

in form ; and this circumstance, coupled with a warning

from some English barons, made Stephen refuse to trust

himself in John's power.” The king vented his wrath by

cutting down the woods on all the archbishop's manors."

On his return from Ireland he dealt a heavy blow at the

religious orders. Towards the end of October he called

1 Brut, a. 1210. Cf. Ann. Cambr., Margan., Tewkesb., Winton., Waverl.

a. 121 1 ; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 203, and R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 235.

Roger says John was back at Whitchurch on August 15.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 203.

* Cf. Canterbury Chronicle, in Stubbs’s Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. pp. cvi., cvii.,

cxi., cxii. ; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. Iof ; R. Coggeshall, p. 164; Ann. Winton.,

Wazerl., and Dunst. a. I2 Io. The date comes from Itin. a. II.

* Ann. Waverl. a. 1211.


16o JOHN LACKLAND chap.

i2 io

I2 i i

together in London the heads of all the religious houses in

England, and compelled them to give him sums of money,

of which the total is said to have amounted to one

hundred thousand pounds." The Cistercians, whom he

had spared in the earlier days of the Interdict, had to

bear the brunt of his exactions now ; they “were forced

to find him chariots with horses and men,” or, as another

writer explains it, their privileges were quashed, and

they had to give the king forty thousand pounds;* more-

over, their abbots were forbidden to attend the triennial

chapter of the order at Citeaux, “lest their piteous com-

plaints should exasperate the whole world against such an

oppressor.””

In June or July 121 1 * the cardinal subdeacon Pandulf,

who was much in the Pope's confidence, and a Templar

named Durand came to England “that they might restore

peace between the Crown and the clergy.”" They seem to

have been sent at the king's request. The terms of the com-

mission which they had received from the Pope are known

from a reissue of it two years later. They were to exhort

John to make satisfaction “according to a form subscribed

between ourself” (the Pope) “and his envoys.” If he would

publicly take an oath of absolute obedience to the Pope's

mandates on all matters for which he was under excom-

munication, they were to give him absolution; and when they

had obtained from him security for the reinstatement of the

archbishop of Canterbury, they were to withdraw the inter-

dict." John met them on his return from Wales, at North-

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 234, 235. He gives no date; but John was in

London, seemingly for the only time in 12 Io, at the end of October; he dates

from the Tower on October 27. /tin. a. I2.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 1210. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 164, and Ann. Waverl.

a. I2IO.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 235.

* M. Paris, Hist. Ang!, vol. ii. p. 12. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 201,

and R. Coggeshall, p. 163.

5 Cf. Ann. Winton. and Waverl. a. I2II.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 235, 236.

7 The second appendix to Innoc. III. App. l. xv. No. 234—“Forma quidem

est talis” (printed also, under the heading “Instructiones legato traditae,” in

Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. Io9)—is obviously a copy, enclosed in a letter of 1213, of the

original commission issued to Pandulf and Durand in 1211. See below, p. 179.


ampton, on August 30," and received them publicly in a 1211

great assembly of the barons. The details of the conference

rest only upon the authority of two comparatively late

monastic chronicles; but there is no reason for doubting the

correctness of the main outlines of their story. The envoys

called upon John to make satisfaction to the Church, restore

the property which he had taken from her ministers, and

receive Archbishop Stephen, the exiled bishops, their kins-

folk and their friends “fairly and in peace.” The king

answered that they might make him swear to restore every-

thing, and he would do whatever else they liked, “but if that

fellow Stephen sets foot in my land, I will have him hanged.”

A discussion followed as to the circumstances of Stephen's

election and the respective rights of Pope and King in such

matters. John ended by offering to receive as archbishop

any one whom the Pope might choose except Stephen, and

to give Stephen another see if he would resign all claims

upon Canterbury. Pandulf scornfully rejected this proposal.

At last, in presence of the whole council, he pronounced

to John's. face the papal sentence of excommunication, of

which, he said, the publication had only been delayed till his

own arrival in England and that of his colleagues; he

absolved all John's subjects from their allegiance, bade them

be ready to join the ranks and obey the leader of any host

which the Pope might send to England, and denounced not

only John himself, but also all his posterity, as for ever

incapacitated for the office of king. It is said that on this

John bade the sheriffs and foresters who were present bring

in whatever prisoners they had in their charge, and gave

orders for the hanging of some and the blinding or mutila-

tion of others, to show the papal envoys his own absolute

power and his ruthlessness in the exercise of it; that among

the prisoners was a clerk charged with forgery, whom he

ordered to be hanged ; that Pandulf wanted to excommuni-

cate at once any one who should lay hands on this man, and

1 The day comes from Ann. Burton. a. 1211, and we know from the Itiner-

ary, a. 13, that John was at Northampton on August 29. The Ann. Waverl.

date this conference a year too late, viz. 1212. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 204;

R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 235, and Ann. Margan., Tewkesb., Winton., Oseney,

and Worcester, a. 1211.

M


-

12i i

I2 I2

went out of the hall to fetch a candle for the purpose, but

that the king followed him and gave up the accused clerk

“to his judgement”—which of course meant, to be set at

liberty." Whether or not the mock tragedy enacted between

king and cardinal really ended in this strange fashion, the

result of the conference was clearly the same as that of all

previous diplomacy between Innocent III. and John : the

Pope gained nothing and the king lost nothing. Pandulf

and Durand went back to Rome accompanied by envoys

from John ; * an order was issued for the recall of the exiles,

but it seems to have taken the form of a writ bidding all

bishops and beneficed clergy return before next mid-summer,

“on pain of losing their property.”* The excommunicate

sovereign kept his Christmas feast at Windsor,” and found

a new triumph awaiting him at the opening of the new

year.

TRing William of Scotland, stricken in years and with no

male heir save one young son, the child of his old age, was

hard pressed by a party in his realm who rallied round a

certain Cuthred MacWilliam, a descendant of the older line

of Scottish kings which the house of Malcolm and Margaret

had ousted from the succession. In despair of overcoming

these rebels, William turned to England for succour, and

early in 12 12 “committed himself, his kingdom and his son

to the care” of his English overlord.” Before Ash Wednes-

day (February 7) he had formally granted to John the

right to dispose of young Alexander in marriage, “as his

liegeman,” within six years from that date." On Mid-Lent

Sunday, March 4, the boy was knighted by John, “as the

king held a festival in the Hospital of S. Bridget at Clerken-

well.” Later in the year an English army marched to

William's aid. John himself probably led his troops as far

as Hexham, where he was on June 27° and then sent

1 Ann. Burton, a. 1211. Cf. Ann. Waverl. a. 1212.

* Ann. Burton, a. 1211.

* Ann. Waverl. a. 1211. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 164.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 238.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 206.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 104.

7 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 238. Cf. Chronn, Mailros and Lanercost, a.

I2 I2. * /tin. a. 14.


them on to Scotland with instructions which proved sufficient

to secure the object of their expedition. They scoured the

country till Cuthred fell into their power; and the struggle

of the old Scottish royal house against the “modern kings”

ended, for a time at least, with the hanging of its champion

by English hands."

Meanwhile, John had never lost sight of his plans for a

renewal of the war with France. The first need of course

was money. It was probably in the hope of finding some

additional sources of revenue which could be claimed for the

Crown that on his return from Ireland he ordered an inquiry

into all assizes of novel disseisin which had been held during

his absence, and also into the right of presentation to, and

actual tenancy of, all ecclesiastical benefices throughout the

country.” An inquest into the services due from the knights

and other tenants-in-chief in every shire was ordered in the

same year or early in the next;" and an inquest concerning

escheated honours and the services due from them was set

on foot shortly afterwards.” In 12 II “the king of France

seized all the English ships that touched his shores, and

therefore ”—says the Dunstable annalist—“the king of

England seized many men of the Cinque Ports”;" a state-

ment which we can only suppose to mean one of two things:

either that John suspected some of the ships to have been

willing prizes, or that he was dissatisfied with the way in

which his sailors had executed, or failed to execute, some

order which he had given for retaliation. In either case,

however, it is clear that he made his displeasure a ground for

further exactions from the leading men of the southern coast

townS.

Of far greater moment than the desultory skirmishes

between the sailors of England and France was the scheme

of European coalition against Philip which John had been

gradually building up during the past ten years. One of

1 W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 206.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 12 Io.

* This inquest was taken a. r. 12 and 13 (i.e. May 1210-May 1212); Red

Book, vol. ii. pp. 469-574.

* A. 13 John (May 1211-May 1212); Red Book, vol. ii. pp. 575-621.

* Ann. Dunst. a. 1211.

I2 I2

I2 II






2-

1197-12oo the most important elements in his political calculations

throughout those years was the course of events in Germany.

The death of the Emperor Henry VI. in September I 197

had been followed by a disputed election to the imperial

crown, the late Emperor's brother, Philip of Suabia, claiming

it for himself against the candidate chosen by the majority

of the electors, Otto of Saxony, a son of Duke Henry the

Lion and Maud, daughter of Henry II. of England.” The

Suabian prince was backed by his powerful family con-

nexions, including the duke of Austria, son and successor

of Richard Coeur-de-Lion's old enemy Leopold. Otto's

youth had been passed in exile at the court of his Angevin

grandfather, and he was a special favourite of his uncle

Richard, who granted him first the earldom of York and

afterwards the county of Poitou, and whose influence with

some of the princes of the empire had had a share in

procuring him their votes. It was, therefore, obvious policy

for his rival and the king of France to make common cause

against him and his kinsman of England. A treaty of

alliance between the two Philips was signed on June 29,

I 1983. In 12oo Otto sent his two brothers to demand for

him from John a renewal of the investiture of York and of

Poitou, and also-if we may belief Roger of Howden—two-

thirds of Richard's treasure and all his jewels, which he said

Richard had bequeathed to him. His assertion was correct

with regard to the jewels, but the other claims are so

unreasonable that it is difficult to believe that they can have

had any justification.” John, however, had an answer ready

* R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 31, 37-9; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 163.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 7o.

* Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 83 and 116. The account of Richard's testa-

mentary dispositions in the former place is open to two interpretations. Richard,

says Roger, “divisit Johanni fratrisuo regnum Angliae . . . et praecepit ut trade-

rentur ei castella sua, et tres partes” [in p. 116 Otto claims only “duas partes”]

“thesauri sui, et omnia baubella sua divisit Othoni nepoti suo regi Alamannorum;

et quartam partem thesauri sui praecepit servientibus suis et pauperibus distribui.”

Grammatically, there is nothing to show whether “tres partes thesauri sui’ is

meant to be connected with “praecepit ut traderentur ei [Johanni]” or with

“divisit Othoni,” but common sense strongly supports the former interpreta-

tion; however anxious Richard may have been to help his nephew, he could not

possibly mean deliberately to leave his own chosen successor literally without a

penny. The actual wording of Richard's will may, indeed, have been as

ambiguous as Roger's summary of it, and Otto may have tried to take advantage


for all these demands. The envoys did not reach him till 1200-1207

after the treaty of Gouleton (May 1200) was signed, and

by that treaty he was pledged to give no help of any kind

to Otto without the consent of the French king." This

excuse, indeed, was only temporary; in June 1201 the

Pope recognized Otto as lawful emperor-elect;” and though

John was at that very moment renewing his treaty with

France, the uncle and nephew speedily drew together.

Throughout the vicissitudes of the next six years John

never lost sight of the community of their interests; he

constantly showed his sense of it by letters and presents, by

loans and gifts of money, and by grants of trading and

other privileges in England to the German and Flemish

cities which supported Otto,” as well as by undertaking the

custody of at least one prisoner of importance who belonged

to the party of Otto's rival.” Otto, whose fortunes were

gradually rising throughout these years, was so fully alive to

the value of the English alliance that in May 1207 he

came to London for a personal interview with John. It is

said that on this occasion Otto promised to conquer the

realm of France and make it over to his uncle, all except

three cities, Paris, Etampes and Orléans, which Philip

Augustus had once jestingly said he would bestow upon

Otto himself if ever the latter became emperor. John gave

his nephew six thousand marks,” and received from him the

of its ambiguity. His claim to the earldoms seems somewhat unreasonable; he

had never really held the earldom of York, and it was for that very reason that

Richard had granted him Poitou ; but it was clearly preposterous to expect John

to renew this latter grant after Otto had accepted the German Crown.

1. R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 116; Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 80.

* Leibnitz and Scheidt, Origines Gueſſicae, vol. iii. pp. 281, 282.

* Rot. Chart. p. 133 (1204); Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. II b (1202), 40, 44

(1204), 48 (1205).

* The young countess of Holland, Ada, daughter and heiress of Count

Theodoric who died in 1203; see Art de Vérifter les Dates, vol. xiv. pp. 261,

430. Her mother at once married her to Louis, count of Los ; her father's

brother, William, claimed Holland against the young couple; he and Louis took

opposite sides on the Imperial question, William holding for Otto, Louis for

Philip of Suabia; and eighteen days after the wedding William drove Ada's

mother and husband out of Holland, captured Ada herself, and sent her to

England to be kept in prison by John. She was still there in 1207, and was

only released when her husband had done homage to both John and Otto, Rot.

Pat. vol. i. p. 82, 82 b.

* Cf. M. Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. iii. p. Io9, and Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 82 b.


**

~

2.

1207

1208

1209

I2 IO

I2 II

I66 JOHN LACKLAND CHAP.

symbolical gift of a great golden crown." As yet, indeed,

Otto was only emperor-elect, and had the conquest of his

own realms to complete ere he could attempt that of

France. But his fortunes were steadily rising; his rival,

Philip of Suabia, was slain in the following summer;” and

on October 4, 1209, just at the moment of his uncle's

triumph over the English Church, he was crowned by the

Pope at Rome.”

Within a year, however, Pope and Emperor had

quarrelled, and Otto was excommunicated.* This was, of

course, an additional bond of union between him and John.

At the same time, a kinsman of both princes was setting

the Pope and the French king alike at defiance. Count

Raymond of Toulouse, the husband of John's sister Joan,

had from the outset favoured the heretics who for the last

two years had kept southern Gaul in turmoil; in 12 I I he

openly allowed them to concentrate in his capital city, and

headed their resistance to the forces which Innocent and

Philip had sent against them under Simon de Montfort.

Toulouse was besieged, but John and Otto kept their

kinsman so well supplied with the means of defence and

sustenance that the “crusaders” at last grew hopeless of

taking it and raised the siege. Otto had answered the

Pope's excommunication by conquering Tuscia, Apulia and

Calabria; whereupon Innocent published another sentence,

deposing him from his imperial office and his German

kingdom, and bidding the princes of the empire elect a new

sovereign in his stead.

John, “with such a comrade,” grew bolder than ever."

The common interest of the three excommunicate kinsmen

obviously lay in crushing France, the ally of the Pope; and

the moment seemed at hand for the fulfilment of John's

highest hopes. John and Raymond in the south, John and

Otto in the north and east, might hem in Philip Augustus

completely, if the princes of the border-land of France and

1 Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 77.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 200.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 227.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 202; R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 232, 233.

| * W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 202, 203.




Germany—Boulogne, Flanders, the Netherlands, Lorraine— 1211-1212

could be so won over as to insure their co-operation in the

plans of the uncle and nephew for the conquest and dis-

memberment of the French kingdom. To this end John's

utmost powers of diplomacy had been devoted for many

years past; and in the case of most of these princes the end

was now gained. In the autumn of 121 f Reginald of

Boulogne, whose policy had long been wavering, quarrelled

openly with Philip and took refuge with his kinsman the

count of Bar;" in May 1212 he was in England, pledging

his homage and his service to John. By the middle of

August the counts of Bar, Limburg, Flanders and Louvain

were all pledged to John's side.” John himself was mean-

while preparing for an expedition to Gascony; on June

1 5 thirty-nine English towns were ordered to furnish

contingents of men “ready to cross the sea with the king in

his service when he should require them.”

A month later, however, the destination of his armament

was changed. Just as his plans were ripe for an attack

upon France, they were checked once more by the necessity

of guarding his realm against the Welsh. Before the close

of I2 II Llywelyn—provoked, as he declared, by “the many

insults done to him by the men of the king”—had leagued

himself with his former rivals in South Wales and taken

“all the castles which John had made in Gwynedd, except

Dyganwy and Rhuddlan.” “ And this time the league was

more likely to hold together than was usually the case with

alliances formed by the Welsh princes either with their

neighbours or with each other; for a new hope had

dawned upon the Welsh people. The tidings of John's

excommunication and deposition by the Pope had penetrated

into Wales; and in this matter the Welsh, although of all

Christian nations probably the least amenable to ecclesiastical

1 W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 162. The date there given is a year too late,

as the English Rolls show. -

* Boulogne, Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 104; Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 116, 117;

Chart. p. 186; Pat. p. 93; Bar and Limburg, Pat. p. 92 b ; Foedera, p. 106;

Flanders, Pat. pp. 93, 94; Louvain, Foedera, pp. 106, Ioy.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 130 b.

* Brut y Tywysogion, a. 1211. Cf. Ann. Cambr. a. 1213.


168 JOHN LACKLAND CHAP.

1212

discipline and the least submissive to ecclesiastical authority,

became full of zeal to do the utmost that in them lay towards

carrying out the Papal sentence against their overlord and

conqueror. “They with one consent,” says their own

chronicler, “rose against the king, and bravely wrested from

him the midland district which he had previously taken from

Llywelyn.”’’ "The version of the English chroniclers is that

the Welsh invaded the English border, took some castles

and beheaded their garrisons, carried off a mass of plunder,

and then burned everything, and slew every man that they

could lay their hands on.”

It was clear that an end must be made of this Welsh

trouble before John could venture across the Channel. He

changed his plans with his usual promptitude. In July the

king's escheators throughout England were ordered to see

that the escheats in their custody should furnish each a

certain number of carpenters and other labourers provided

with proper tools, and with money enough to carry them to

Chester. Writs were also issued to Alan of Galloway bid-

ding him send a thousand of his “best and bravest men,”

to William the Marshal, Bishop John of Norwich, and others

of the king's liegemen in Ireland, and to the tenants by

serjeanty throughout England, requiring their personal

attendance; the place of muster for all alike being Chester,

and the appointed date Sunday, August 19.” On August

16, however, the king sent out from Nottingham a

notice that he was unable to be at Chester on the day

fixed, and that the muster would not take place.* The

orders which he issued next day indicate that he was con-

templating a diversion by sea, part of the fleet being ordered

to sail from Chester, coast along North Wales, and “do as

much harm to the enemy as possible,” while another part

was to assemble at Bristol." He probably meant to await

the result of these movements, as well as of some negotia-

tions which he was carrying on with the South Welsh

1 Brut, a. 1212.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 238; R. Coggeshall, p. 164.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 131, 131 b,

* Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 94.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. pp. 121 b, 122.




chieftains, before deciding whether his main advance should 1212

be made by way of North or South Wales.

The host finally mustered at Nottingham in the second

week of September.” The chivalry of England gathered Sept. 9-15

round the king “in such array and in such numbers,” says

a contemporary, “that no man of our day remembers the

like.”* John's first act on reaching the muster-place, “before

he tasted food,” was to hang twenty-eight of the hostages

whom he had taken from the Welsh in the previous year.”

But “suddenly God brought his counsel to nought.”" As

he sat at table there came to him a breathless messenger

from the king of Scots, followed by one from the Princess

Joan of Wales, John's daughter and Llywelyn's wife. Both

messengers brought letters whose contents, they said, were

weighty and secret. When the two letters were read, their

purport proved to be almost identical. William and Joan

alike warned the king that his barons were preparing to act

upon the papal sentence which absolved them from their

allegiance, and, if he persisted in leading them to war, either

to turn and slay him themselves, or deliver him up to death

at the hands of his Welsh enemies.” Such a warning, com-

ing at the same instant from two such different quarters,

was not to be lightly put aside. It was emphasized by the

sudden disappearance of two barons, Eustace de Vesci and

Robert FitzWalter, who at once secretly withdrew from the

host." John could hardly doubt the significance of their

departure at such a moment. He dismissed his army and

moved by slow stages back to London.”

- The month which had elapsed between John's order

countermanding the muster at Chester and his return to

1 Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 123 b.

* Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 239, and Itin. a. 14.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 207.

* Cf. ib. and R. Wendover, as above.

* W. Coventry, l.c. 6 R. Wendover, l.c.

7 Ann. Waverl. a. 1212. See Note II. at end.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 239; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 207. John was at

Nottingham September 9-15, and reached London on the 20th, after passing

through “Salvata,” Geddington, Northampton, and St. Albans, Itin. a. I4.

The assertion of the Ann. Margam. (a. 121 1 for 1212) that in his terror at the

discovery of the meditated treason he “shut himself up for fifteen days in Notting-

ham castle” is thus shown to be false.


Nottingham had been spent by him in a progress through

the north; * and it was probably during this time that there

came to his ears a prediction concerning him spoken by one

Peter, variously described as “of Pontefract” or “of Wake-

field.” This Peter was “a simple countryman,” who lived

on bread and water, and was counted among the people for

a prophet. He foretold that on the next Ascension Day

John should cease to be king. Whether John was to die,

or to be driven from the land, or to abdicate, Peter could

not say; he only knew that it had been revealed to him in

a vision that after the king had reigned prosperously for

fourteen years, neither he nor his heirs should rule any

more, “but one who is pleasing to God.”” John, on hear-

ing of this prophecy, laughed it to scorn; but when Peter

was found to be wandering all over the north country

publishing his supposed vision wherever he went, some of

the king's friends deemed it prudent to take the prophet

into custody.” He was brought before John himself, who

asked for more explicit information as to his own impending

fate. Peter only replied, “Know thou of a surety that on

the day which I have named, thou shalt be king no more ;

and if I be proved a liar, do with me as thou wilt.”

“According to thy word, so be it,” answered John ; and he

sent the man to be imprisoned at Corfe.” This precaution,

however, defeated its own end; Peter's captivity in a royal

dungeon gave to him and his prophecy a new importance in

popular estimation; his words were repeated far and wide,

and believed “as if they had been spoken by a voice from

Heaven”" The dread which they are said to have inspired

in the king himself" proves nothing as to whether, or how

far, he shared the superstitious credulity of his people.

Apart from all such questions, he had obviously a sufficient

reason for alarm in the fact that the general acceptance of a

political prophecy naturally tends to work its fulfilment.

1212

* Itin. a. 14.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 208. Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 240; Hist.

des Ducs, pp. 122, 123; Ann. Tewkesbury, a. 1212, and Chron. Lanercost, a.

I2 I3. * W. Coventry, l.c.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 240. * Ib. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 208.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 248.


Other influences were working in the same direction.

Even without the special warnings, which he had received

at Nottingham, John must have been well aware that he

had, as Roger of Wendover says, “almost as many enemies

as he had barons.” The question was only how soon their

silent hate would break out in open defiance, and whether

he could once more terrify or beguile them into submission

before the smouldering embers of their discontent were

kindled into a general conflagration by Innocent's anathema

and Peter's prophecy. On reaching London he addressed

to all those whose fidelity he suspected a new demand for

hostages, “that he might prove who would and who would

not obey his orders.” The response showed that he was

even yet stronger than he himself had dared to believe.

From many of these men he had already had hostages in

his keeping for years; several of them had suffered in their

family relations a far deeper injury at his hands; yet once

again, at his bidding, they gave up to him sons, nephews,

kinsmen, “as many as he would, not daring to resist his

commands.”” Eustace de Vesci and Robert Fitz-Walter alone

refused all purgation, and fled, the one to Scotland, the other

to France; their castles were seized, their lands confiscated,

and themselves outlawed.” With his own servants and

clerks the king dealt in yet more summary fashion; those

among them whom he suspected were arrested and cast into

prison.” Fresh humiliations were heaped upon the clergy.

The Cistercians are said to have been mulcted of twenty-two

thousand pounds in punishment for the help which they were

supposed to have given to the enemies of Raymond of Tou-

louse;" and all the English clergy, both regular and secular,

1 R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 241. * Ib. pp. 238, 239.

* Ib. p. 240; R. Coggeshall, p. 165; W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 207. The

entry in Ann. Dunst. a. 121 1 about the razing of Fitz-Walter's castles and the

cutting down of his woods is probably misplaced, and should be referred to 1212.

See Note II. at end.

* W. Coventry, l.c. R. Coggeshall, l.c., and Ann. Dunst. a. 1211 (for 1212)

name as one of these victims a clerk called Geoffrey of Norwich, whom M.

Paris, Hist. Angl. vol. ii. p. 126 and Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 527, confuses

with the archdeacon whose fate is related by Roger of Wendover, vol. iii.

p. 229. See above, p. 136.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 164.

I212


1212

were forced to set their hands to a deed whereby they re-

nounced all pecuniary claims against the king, and declared

that all the money which he had had from them since his

accession was a free and voluntary gift.” On the other

hand, John was taking some pains to conciliate the people.

He checked the severity of the Forest administration.

He forbade the extortions practised by his officers on mer-

chants and pilgrims. “Moreover, he is said to have showed

mercy on widows, and done what in him lay to promote

peace in temporal affairs.” Sternness and conciliation alike

did their work. Again “the land kept silence”;” and it

seems that the first sound which broke the silence was a

declaration of the barons in favour of the king. -

Some time between the summer of 1212 and the spring

of 12 13 two remarkable letters were written by John, the

one to his chief justiciar in Ireland, Bishop John of Norwich,

the other to Earl William the Marshal.” Both letters deal

with the same subjects, and they were evidently despatched

both at once. The king greatly commends the bishop's

discretion in the matter of “the oath of fealty lately sworn

to us by our barons of Ireland, for the greater safety of

ourself and our realm,” for which, he says, he is sending

letters of thanks to them all. He expresses the warmest

gratitude to William the Marshal, “as their spokesman in

this matter, and also as the one from whose suggestion and

sole desire we doubt not this thing took its rise, and to

whom we are indebted for the ready disposition and devotion

of all the rest.” He states further that he is sending to the

bishop, the earl, and the other barons of the March “copies

of the letters patent which our magnates of England have

drawn up for us,” and he requests that the barons of Ireland

will “set their seals to letters of similar tenour, and send

1. Cf. Rot. Chart. pp. 191 b, 192; Ann. Waverl. a. 1212 ; W. Coventry,

vol. ii. p. 207; R. Coggeshall, p. 165, and M. Paris, Hist. Angl, vol. ii. p. 132,

and Chron. Maj. vol. ii. p. 537.

* W. Coventry, l.c.

* From the tenour of these letters it is clear that neither of the persons

addressed had been in England recently. We must therefore suppose that an order

countermanding the muster at Chester had reached the barons in Ireland before

they set out to obey the royal summons, and that for the muster at Nottingham

their presence had not been required.


them to us.” Lastly, he alludes to some advice which the

Marshal and the other lay barons in Ireland “have sent to

us about making peace with the Church,” and desires that

they will “provide, by the common counsel of our faithful

subjects in those parts, a form whereby peace may be made

sure without injury to our liberties and rights,” and transmit

it to him. “See you to it,” he adds to the justiciar, “that

this be done.””

We can hardly doubt that there is some connexion

between these letters and another yet more remarkable docu-

ment, whose date must lie between Pandulf's visit in August

121 1 and the spring of I2 I 3. This is a manifesto addressed

“to all faithful Christians” by “the whole of the magnates of

Ireland,” with Willam the Marshal and Meiler Fitz-Henry at

their head, expressing their “grief and astonishment” that

the Pope should propose to absolve the subjects of the

king of England from their allegiance, and declaring their

approval of John's political conduct and their determination

to “live and die with their king.”.” This manifesto may

have been drawn up when the barons of the Irish March, at

the Marshal's suggestion, renewed their fealty to John ; or it

may have been their answer to John's request that they

would set their hands to and transmit to him letters patent

similar to those which, he says, had been “made for him "

by the magnates of England. There is, indeed, another

possible alternative. On more than one occasion, and by

more than one chronicler, John is charged with forging

letters and other like documents. The letter ascribed to

the magnates of Ireland and the letters—of which nothing

is now known—sent to them by John as having been issued

by the magnates of England may therefore have been both

alike forgeries. There is, however, nothing to indicate

that such was the case. If it was not, then it seems that

the barons of England, who in the autumn of 1212 were

believed to be on the verge of rebellion or something worse,

were yet so weak, as well as so false, that John could force

1 Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 132 b (a. r. 14).

* Hunter, Three Catalogues, pp. 42, 43; Sweetman, Cal. Doc. Ireland,

vol. i. pp. 73, 74 (No. 448).

I2 I2


I2 I2

from them a collective declaration in writing which, what-

ever its precise import may have been, was evidently a

declaration in his interest and for his advantage; and that

in the same crisis the barons of the Irish March, acting

under the guidance of the noblest and wisest man in their

whole order, ranged themselves boldly on the side of John

against all his enemies. The king, to whom for a moment

ruin had seemed so near that he himself gave way to

despair, was within a few months, perhaps even a few weeks,

outwardly more than ever supreme.

On the other hand, those same loyal barons in Ireland

who seem to have so emphatically declared their resolve to

stand by the king in resistance to the papal sentence of

deposition had yet urged upon him the importance of pro-

curing a withdrawal of that sentence by endeavouring to

make peace with the Church. Whether they did, accordin

to John's request, draft a form of proposals to be laid before

the Pope, there is nothing to show ; but it is certain that in

November John despatched to Rome four envoys charged

to offer his acceptance of the terms which Pandulf and

Durand had proposed fifteen months before."

John, in fact, knew well how unsubstantial his apparent

supremacy was, and how hollow were the foundations ori

which it rested. He knew that if he wished to prevent the

fulfilment of Peter's prophecy, he must now disarm once for

all, and secure permanently for his own interest, some one

at least of the various enemies, or groups of enemies, against

whom he had been struggling for six years at such over-

whelming odds. By the end of 1212 the signs of the times

were beginning to point out who this one must be; by the

early spring of I2 13 there could no longer be any doubt on

the point. The fortunes of war in Germany and in southern

Gaul had shattered John's hopes of crushing Innocent and

Philip Augustus both at once. In Aquitaine Simon de

Montfort and his “crusaders” were gradually winning their

way against the Albigenses, and Raymond of Toulouse was

practically ruined. In Germany the young King Frederic

* Cf. Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 126; Innoc. III. Epp. 1. xv. No. 234, and

Ann. Burton, a. 121 I, 1214.




of Sicily had at the Pope's instigation been elected to the

empire in Otto's stead. Otto sought to regain his footing in

the country by marrying the daughter of his former rival,

Duke Philip of Suabia; but the bride died a few days after

her marriage;" and in November (1212) the political league

which Innocent was building up against Otto and John was

completed by a treaty of alliance between Frederic and

Philip Augustus.” Triumphant everywhere on the con-

tinent, Innocent resolved to make an end of matters with

John. [In the winter of 1212 Stephen Langton and the

bishops of Ely and London carried to Rome in person their

complaints against their sovereign, and their entreaties that

such a state of things should be suffered to continue no

longer. In January 1213 they returned to the French

court accompanied by Pandulf, and bringing with them a

letter from the Pope to the French king.” Innocent in this

letter solemnly laid upon Philip, for his soul's health, the

task of expelling the English king from his realm, and bade

him assume in John's stead the sovereignty of England for

himself and his heirs for ever.” It is said that the Pope

wrote at the same time to the other sovereigns and princes

of Europe, bidding them join under Philip's leadership in a

sort of crusade against John, and granting to all who should

take part in this expedition the same privileges, temporal

and spiritual, which were conferred on pilgrims to the Holy

Sepulchre.”

These letters and the papal decree for John's deposition

were publicly read to the French bishops, clergy and people

in a council assembled for that purpose at Soissons on the

Monday in Holy Week, April 8.” It was no new idea

that the papal mandate suggested to Philip Augustus. For

a whole year at least he had been contemplating the con-

quest of England and the establishment of his eldest son,

Louis, upon its throne; in April 12 12 Louis had already

1 Orig. Guefficae, vol. iii. pp. 340, 341 ; W. Coventry, vol. ii. pp. 204, 205.

* Martène, Ampliss. Collectio, vol. i. col. I I I I. Cf. W. Armor. Gesta

P. A. cc. 158, 159.

3 Cf. R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 241, 242, and R. Coggeshall, p. 165.

* R. Wendover, l.c. * R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 241, 242.

0 W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 165.

I2 I-2

August

1213


arranged the terms on which he would receive the homage

of the English barons and the political relation in which he

was to stand towards his father after his own coronation in

England." To Philip and Louis the Pope's commission was

merely the signal that their longed-for hour had come.

“Then the king of the French, hearing and receiving the

thing which he had long desired, girded himself up for the

fight,” and bade all his men, on pain of “culvertage,” be

ready to meet him at Rouen on April 21, the first Sunday

after Easter;” and ships, victuals, arms and men were

rapidly gathered together in answer to his call.”

Still more prompt and vigorous were John's preparations

for defence. He seems to have begun by ordering that all

English ships should return to the ports to which they

severally belonged not later than the first Sunday in Lent,

March 3. On that day he despatched writs to the bailiffs

of the seaport towns, bidding them make out a list of the

vessels which they found in their respective ports capable of

carrying six horses or more, and direct the captains and

owners of all such vessels, in his name, to bring them to

Portsmouth at Mid-Lent (March 21), “well manned with

good and brave mariners, well armed, who shall go on our

service at our expense.” “ He next bade the sheriffs summon

all earls, barons, knights, freemen and sergeants, whosoever

they were and of whomsoever they held, who ought to have

arms or could get them, and who had done him homage and

fealty, to the intent that, “as they love us and themselves

and all that is theirs, they be at Dover at the close of Easter

next, well prepared with horses and arms and with all their

might to defend our head, and their own heads, and the land

of England. And let no man who can bear arms stay behind,

on pain of culvertage and perpetual servitude; and let each

man follow his own lord ; and let those who have no land

and can carry arms come thither to take our pay.” Each

I213

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. Iod.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 243. Cf. W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 209. W.

Armor. Philipp. l. ix. v. 235, makes the day April 22. “Culvertage” was the

penalty for treason—forfeiture and perpetual servitude.

8 W. Coventry, l.c.

* Writ given by R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 244.


sheriff was to see that all sales of victuals and all markets

within his sheriffdom “followed the host,” and that none were

held elsewhere within his jurisdiction. He himself was to

come to the muster “in force, with horses and arms,” and to

bring his roll, whereby the king might be certified who had

obeyed his summons and who had stayed behind."

England responded as quickly and readily as France to

the call of her king ; the threat of “culvertage" seems to

have acted upon the Englishmen of John's day as the threat

of being accounted “nithing” had acted upon their fore-

fathers in the days of William Rufus and Henry I. ; they

came together at the appointed places—Dover, Faversham

and Ipswich—in such crowds that in a few days, despite

John's precautions, the supply of food became insufficient,

and the marshals of the host found it needful to dismiss the

greater part of the light-armed troops, retaining only the

knights, sergeants and better-armed freemen, with the cross-

bowmen and archers. The picked body thus left, which was

finally reviewed by the king on Barham Down, near Canter-

bury, was still so numerous that a patriotic chronicler declares,

“If they had been all of one heart and mind for king and

country, there was no prince under heaven against whom

they could not have defended the realm of England.” ” How

many of the barons in the host had come to it with the

intention of going over to Philip as soon as he landed, it is

useless to inquire; perhaps the only one whom we can with

full confidence acquit of any such suspicion is William the

Marshal.” The king's plan, however, was that his fleet should

* Writ in R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 245.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 245, 246. Cf. Ann. Dunst. a. 1212 (evidently

meant for 1213). John was at Canterbury May 4-6, 1213; ſtin. a. 14.

* John, who in his prosperous days made almost a parade of disbelief in

William's loyalty, and delighted in straining it to the uttermost by saying and

doing everything he could think of to insult and provoke William, nevertheless

knew well that in moments of peril William was the one counsellor to whose dis-

interestedness he could safely trust, the one follower on whom he could count

unreservedly, the one friend whom he could not do without. So at the close of

1212 or early in 1213 he had recalled the Marshal to his side, and proved his

confidence in him by giving him back his two sons who were in England as

hostages (Hist, de G. le Mar. vv. 14492-598). The bishop of Norwich had

also come over from Ireland with five hundred knights and other horsemen to

join the muster (R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 245). It tells something of the success of

John's measures for the settlement of the Irish March that the simultaneous

N

1213

May 4-6




NA

1213

intercept the invaders and “drown them in the sea before

ever they could set foot on the land”; and as his ships were

more numerous than Philip's, the plan had a good chance of .

success."

But the first check to Philip's enterprise was to come

from another quarter. Even if we could perceive no outward

indication of the Pope's motives in giving his commission to

the French king, we should still find it hard to believe that

so far-seeing a statesman as Innocent III. seriously contem-

plated with approval the prospect of a French conquest of

England. At the moment, indeed, France was the most

efficient political instrument of the Papacy; but it could

scarcely be a part of the papal policy to give her such an

overwhelming predominance as she would have acquired by

the annexation of England to her crown. England, no less

than France, had her place in the European political system,

of which Innocent looked upon himself as the director and

the guardian ; and the extinction of England as an indepen-

dent state would have destroyed the balance of powers which

it was a special function of the Papacy to maintain with the

utmost care, and whose preservation was of great importance

to Innocent for carrying into effect his own political designs.