”

It may have been to facilitate negotiations with the

Bretons and Angevins that John had proceeded so far as

1199

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 95. * Rot. Chart. p. 30.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 96. * Itin. a. I.

* R. Howden, l.c.

* John d'Erlée, Hist, de G. le Mar. v. 12472, calls it “Borc la Reine,”

but seemingly for no other reason than that he had ended his previous line with

the word “fine” and wanted a rime to it.

7 Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 12471-86. 8 Rot. Chart, l.c.


III JoAN “SoFTsworD" 71

Anvers, which lies in the south of Maine, close to the border

of Anjou. We next find him overtaking Philip at the siege

of Lavardin. Philip hereupon withdrew to Le Mans; but

he had cut the ground from under his own feet; the garrison

of Le Mans was under the orders of William des Roches,

who had been appointed commandant there by Philip him-

self. John, too, was following close behind; and when he

appeared before the city, Philip again beat a hasty retreat,

while William des Roches brought Arthur and Constance

in person to make their peace with John, and then opened

the gates of Le Mans to the new allies. John, in anti-

cipation of his triumph, had already summoned Almeric,

the viscount of Thouars, who was acting as seneschal of

Anjou and commandant of Chinon for Arthur, to come

and submit to him at Le Mans. On the very day of

John's entry into the city, September 22, Almeric obeyed.

Next day John proceeded to Chinon, where he installed

Roger de Lacy as castellan in Almeric's stead. With less

than his usual caution, he let Arthur, Constance and their

friends, including Almeric, stay behind at Le Mans. Some

one had already suggested to Arthur a suspicion that his

uncle intended to make him a prisoner; as soon, therefore,

as John was out of the way at Chinon, the majority of the

Bretons, with their young duke, his mother, and the viscount

of Thouars, returned on September 24 to their old head-

quarters at Angers." It was probably tidings of this which

made John hasten back from Chinon to Le Mans, where

he was again September 27 to 30 ; after that nothing is

known of his movements till October 6, when he was at

Saumur.” His appearance there is suggestive, for Saumur

was the key of the Angevin border towards Poitou on the

south and Touraine on the east. With Le Mans, Chinon

and Saumur all in his hands, he had only to secure a firm

foothold in Aquitaine, and then he might attack Anjou from

three sides at once. But to attack it without such a foot-

1 R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 96, 97. Cf. R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 167, Rot.

Chart. p. 31, and for dates Itin. a. 1, which show that Roger's “mense

Octobris” cannot be right. That Constance had come with her son is nowhere

stated, but appears from the sequel.

* /tin. a. 1.

I 199


I 199

I2OO

hold, and with only the small force which he had brought

with him from Normandy," would have been worse than

useless. On October 8, therefore, John was once more at

Le Mans, and thence he fell back upon Normandy.”

There was indeed another reason for his return. Cardinal

Peter of Capua, who had at the beginning of the year

negotiated a truce between Philip and Richard, was still at

the French court. The truce had been made for three

years; Richard's death had of course put an abrupt end to

it; but Peter was urgent that it should be renewed for its

original term between Philip and John. Such a proposal

implied that John was recognized at Rome as Richard's

lawful heir ; it was therefore obviously politic for John to

cherish such a valuable alliance by falling in with the

cardinal's endeavours after a pacification. Through Peter's

mediation a truce was made at the end of October. Its

term was fixed for the ensuing S. Hilary's Day; * but there

was evidently a tacit understanding that it was to be the

forerunner of a more lasting agreement.

This truce set John free for a visit to Aquitaine. On

November 8 he was at Niort, and in the beginning of

December at Poitiers; by the middle of December he had

returned to Normandy.” Meanwhile a question which had

been pending for several years, as to the legality of Philip's

repudiation of his queen Ingebiorg and his subsequent union

with Agnes of Merania, had been, in a council at Dijon on

December 6, decided by Cardinal Peter against the king,

and Peter had laid the royal domain of France under an

interdict which was to take effect from January 15, 12oo,”

the second day after the expiration of the truce. With this

prospect before his eyes, Philip dared not insult John as he

had insulted him at their last meeting. It was with a very

different proposal that he met him at the old trysting-place

between Gaillon and Les Andelys. A project which had

been mooted just twelve months before, for a family alliance

to cement peace between the houses of France and Anjou,

* Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 12473-4. * Itin. a. 1.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 97. Rigord, c. 129, says S. John's Day.

* Itin. a. 1. * Rigord, c. 131.


III JOHN “SOFTSWORD." 73

º

*

was now revived ; it was proposed that Philip's son Louis

should marry John's niece Blanche of Castille, and that

John should furnish the bride with a dowry in Norman lands

and English money." The two kings “rushed into each

other's arms,” and renewed their truce till midsummer.”

While Eleanor went to Spain to fetch her grand-

daughter,” John seized his opportunity for a visit to England.”

His first business there was to concert measures with the

justiciar for raising the required sum of money. They

decided that the taxes for the year should consist of a

scutage of two marks on the knight's fee and a payment of

three shillings for “every working plough.”* John then

went to York, where he had summoned the Scot king to

meet him at the end of March. William, however, failed to

appear.” During John's stay at York a claim of exemption

from the plough tax was laid before him by the heads of

some of the great Cistercian houses in Yorkshire in behalf

of their whole order; this led to a violent quarrel between

them and the king, which was still unsettled when he returned

to Normandy at the end of April.” Thither Blanche was

brought to meet him, and on Ascension Day (May 18)*

he and Philip, at a personal meeting on the border, made a

definite treaty of peace. By that treaty Philip in so many

words acknowledged John as “his brother Richard's right

heir,” and granted him, as such, the investiture of the whole

Angevin dominions, with the exception of certain territories

which John ceded to the crown of France. These were the

Vexin, Auvergne, the greater part of the county of Evreux,

and the lordships of Issoudun, Graçay, and Bourges. To

the cession of the Vexin and of the chief border castles of

the county of Evreux, as well as to the resignation of the

* R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 106, Ioy; R. Coggeshall, pp. Ioo, IoI.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 92.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 107.

* He landed at Portsmouth on February 24, Ann. Winton. a. 1200.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 101. Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 107.

* R. Howden, l.c. John was at York March 25 to 28, Itin. a. 1.

* R. Coggeshall, pp. 102, 103. John was at Porchester on April 28, and at

Valognes on May 2, Itin. a. I.

* Rigord, c. 132. Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 115, whose chronology is

less sound.

12oo


tºoo

Angevin claim upon Auvergne, Richard had been pledged

by his treaty with Philip in I 195; Issoudun and Graçay

had been restored to the English king by the same treaty,

having been ceded by Richard to France in 1189." Twenty

thousand marks and the formal cession of all these territories

—most, if not all, of which were already in Philip's hands—

was not too heavy a price to pay for the personal triumph

and the political gain involved in Philip's recognition of

John as the lawful heir to Normandy, Maine, Anjou,

Touraine and Aquitaine, and also to the overlordship of

Britanny; for not only was this last right distinctly conceded

to him by Philip, but Arthur was then and there made to

do homage to his uncle for his duchy’ as soon as John

himself had done homage to Philip for the whole continental

heritage of the house of Anjou.” The marriage of Louis

and Blanche took place four days later.”

John now set out upon a sort of triumphal progress

southward, to take seisin of all his dominions. On June

18 he reached Angers, where he stayed four days and took

a hundred and fifty hostages as security for the loyalty of

the citizens.” At the end of June he was at Tours, and

early in July at Poitiers, whence he proceeded into Gascony;

on the 14th he was welcomed at Bordeaux by the arch-

bishop and the barons of the land." He immediately secured

the help of the Gascon primate in a scheme which he had

been cherishing for some months past for getting rid of the

wife to whom he had been married for eleven years, Isabel

of Gloucester. The papal legate who in 1189 had revoked

the sentence passed by Archbishop Baldwin upon John and

Isabel had done so on the ground that, since John had appealed

to Rome, his marriage must be recognized as lawful, pending

the result of the appeal. A decision of the Pope on that

appeal would of course have either annulled the marriage

*

* Cf. the treaty of 1200 in R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 148-51, and Foedera,

vol. i. pt. i. pp. 79, 80, with that of 1195 in Foedera, ib. p. 66.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 150.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 101.

* Rigord, c. 132. Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 115.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 125. Dates from Itin. a. 2.

* Itin. a. 2. For the reception at Bordeaux see Hist. de G. le Mar. vv.

I 1956-8.


lin Johny “SoFTS word” 75

or made it indissoluble ; but it seems that no such decision

had ever been given, because the appeal had never been

prosecuted. The marriage was therefore still voidable. At

the close of 1199 John called upon the Norman bishops to

declare it void, and they obeyed him." He now, it seems,

laid the case before the archbishop of Bordeaux and the

bishop of Poitiers and Saintes; and their decision was in

accord with that of their Norman brethren.” On the bare

question—which was doubtless all that John put before

them—whether a marriage between cousins in the fourth

degree was lawful without a dispensation, indeed, no other

decision was possible according to the letter of the canon

law. The Pope, however, when the matter came to his

knowledge, seems to have felt that in this particular case

adhesion to the letter of the law involved a violation of its

spirit, and to have been extremely angry with John's

episcopal tools as well as with John himself.” He had,

however, no ground for interfering in the matter except on

an appeal from Isabel; and Isabel did not appeal.” There

is every reason to think—and certainly no reason to wonder

—that the removal of the matrimonial yoke was as welcome

to her as to John, and that their divorce was in fact, like

that of Louis VII. and Eleanor, a separation by mutual

COnSent,

John had already chosen another heiress to take

Isabel's place. One of the most important, and also most

troublesome, feudataries of the duchy of Aquitaine was

Ademar, count of Angoulême. It was in a quarrel with

him and his half-brother, the viscount of Limoges, that

Richard Coeur-de-Lion had met his death, which Richard's

son had avenged by slaying the viscount.” The feud

between the houses of Angoulême and Limoges thus

threatened to be a considerable hindrance to Richard's

successor in his efforts to secure a hold upon his southern

* R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 167. * R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 119.

* R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 167. R. Coggeshall, p. 103, has another version,

but it seems to be incorrect. On the whole question of this divorce see Prof.

Maitland's remarks in Eng. Hist. Rev. Oct. 1895, vol. x. pp. 758, 759.

* Innoc. III. Epp. 1. v. No. 50.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 97.

I2Oo


duchy. How formidable Ademar and his nephew, the new

viscount of Limoges, had already made themselves is shown

by the insertion in the treaty between John and Philip of

a special provision that John should “receive their homage

and grant them their rights.”.” It is said to have been

Philip who counselled John to secure the fidelity of Ademar

of Angoulême in another way, by taking to wife Ademar's

only child.” Philip's motives for giving the advice, and

John's motives for following it, are alike obscure. Nineteen

years before, Richard, as duke of Aquitaine, had vainly

striven to wrest Angoulême from Ademar in behalf of

Matilda, the only child of Ademar's late brother, Count

Vulgrin III. Matilda was now the wife of Hugh “the

Brown" of Lusignan, who in 1179 or I 180 had, in spite

of King Henry, made himself master of the county of La

Marche, and whose personal importance in southern Gaul

was increased by the rank and fame which his brothers

Geoffrey, Guy and Almeric had won in the kingdoms of

Jerusalem and Cyprus. The dispute between Matilda and

her uncle had been settled by the betrothal of her son—

another Hugh the Brown — to Ademar's daughter and

heiress, Isabel.” A marriage between John and this little

Isabel of Angoulême, therefore, would be certain to provoke

the bitter resentment of the whole Lusignan family. On

the other hand, it would provoke their resentment against

Isabel's father as well as against her husband, and thus

destroy the chance of a coalition of Angoulême and La

Marche against their common overlord. It is not impossible

that for John, who gambled in politics as habitually as he did

at the game of “tables,” the very wantonness of the scheme

and the hazards attendant upon it may have only added

to its attractions. But his subsequent conduct towards the

Lusignans suggests the idea that he may have had a deeper

12oo

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 150. This was in fulfilment of an agreement

made between Philip on the one part, and the count of Angoulême and the

viscount of Limoges on the other, just after Richard's death. Round, Cal. Doc.

France, vol. i. p. 471.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 119 ; R. Coggeshall, p. 103.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 119 ; R. Coggeshall, pp. 128, 129; R. Wendover,

vol. iii. p. 168. All these writers confuse Isabel’s betrothed with his father.


III JOHN “SoFTS word" 77

motive, a deliberate purpose of goading them into some

outrageous course of action which might enable him to

recover La Marche and ruin them completely, or even drive

them altogether out of the land.

On his way to Poitou John issued from Chinon, on

June 25, a summons to Ademar of Angoulême and Guy

of Limoges to come and perform their homage on July 5

at Lusignan, the ancestral home of Hugh the Brown.

There Hugh and Matilda were bringing up their intended

daughter-in-law in company with her boy bridegroom, and

there John was no doubt, at the moment, sure of a welcome,

for Hugh and his brother Ralf had become his liegemen

at Caen on January 28.” Thus, in all likelihood, it was

under Hugh's very roof, and as sharers in his hospitality,

that the king of England and the count of Angoulême

laid their plot for robbing Hugh's son of his plighted bride

and his promised heritage. John indeed, as soon as his

divorce was ratified by the southern bishops, despatched,

or gave out that he had despatched, an embassy to Portugal

with instructions to ask for the hand of a daughter of the

Portuguese king; * but their mission was a mere blind to

divert suspicion till Ademar should have succeeded in

getting his child back into his own hands. The poor little

betrothed—she was only about twelve years old *—was

literally stolen by her father,” and carried off by him to his

capital city. There her royal suitor met them, and on or

about August 26 the marriage ceremony was performed

by the archbishop of Bordeaux." The newly married

couple immediately afterwards set out for the north; at the

beginning of October they went to England, and on the

8th they were crowned together at Westminster.”

Six weeks later the king of Scots made his sub-

mission. Summoned to meet his overlord at Lincoln on

1 Rot. Chart. p. 97. * Zb. pp. 58, 59.

* R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 17o. * R. Coggeshall, p. 103.

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 1 1984-6. Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 119.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 12o. For date see Itin. a. 2, and Rot. Chart.

. 75.

p 7 R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 139; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 17o; R. Coggeshall,

p. 103 (with a wrong date).

I2OO


1200

I2OI

November 21, William the Lion this time did not venture to

disobey the summons; both kings reached Lincoln on the

appointed day. Next morning John, in defiance of an

old tradition which forbade a king to appear in regal state

within the walls of Lincoln, went to the minster and offered

a golden chalice at the altar of S. John the Baptist. Thence

he proceeded to his colloquy with William “on the top of

the steep hill” outside the city. There, amid a group of

prelates and barons, and “in the sight of all the people,”

William performed his homage, and swore on Archbishop

Hubert's cross that he would be faithful to John against

all men, “saving his own right.” Then, and not till then,

did he venture again to demand, “as his right and heritage,”

the disputed counties. A long discussion ended in an

adjournment of the question till the next Whitsuntide;

which of course meant that it was to be put off indefinitely.

On the morrow (November 23) the king of Scots set

out on his homeward journey, while the king of England

helped with his own hands to carry to its last resting-place

in Lincoln minster the body of the only man among his

father's old friends for whom he seems to have felt a real

liking, though he turned a deaf ear to his counsels—S. Hugh,

who had died in London a week before." Soon after

Christmas John was at Lincoln again, quarrelling with the

canons about the election of Hugh's successor.” He and

his young queen afterwards made a progress through the

north, almost up to the Scottish border,” and back through

Cumberland to York, which they reached at Mid-Lent

(March 1, 1201). At Easter (March 25) they “wore their

crowns” at Canterbury.”

Meanwhile, open hostilities had begun between John

and the Lusignans; and so far as can be made out from

the scanty evidence available, it seems to have been John

who began them. A French historian of the time asserts

that the castle of Driencourt in Normandy, which belonged

to Ralf of Lusignan as count of Eu in right of his wife,

was seized by John's orders while Ralf was in John's

* R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 140-3. * Ib. p. 156.

* Itin. a. 2. * R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 16o.




lii JoAN “SoFTS worp” 79

service in England." It is certain that John, on March 6,

1201, issued letters patent to Hugh of Bailleul and Thomas

of St. Valery authorizing them to attack Ralf's territories at

the close of Easter and “do him all the harm they could,”

and promising that they should never be compelled to make

good any damage which they might inflict upon him ;

while on the same day one William “de Kaev" was

despatched on a mission to the inhabitants of Driencourt

and of the whole county of Eu to make arrangements for

mutual security between them and the king, without refer-

ence to their count.” Two days later John summoned all

his faithful barons, knights, clerks, burghers, and other

tenants of the county of La Marche “to come to his service,

and do to him what they had been wont to do to his

predecessors.”* In other words, he claimed the direct

ownership of the county, to which his father had indeed

been entitled by purchase from the late Count Adelbert and

by the homage of its tenants, but of which Henry had

never been able and Richard had never even tried to take

possession, and which Hugh of Lusignan had now held for

more than twenty years. If their oath of liege homage to

John had hitherto restrained Hugh and Ralf from giving

vent to their anger at John's marriage, it restrained them

no longer now. They at once laid a complaint against

John, for unjust aggression and spoliation, before the king

of France as lord paramount of Aquitaine.” Ralf formally

renounced his allegiance to John,” and Hugh, with all the

forces that he could muster, invaded Poitou, where, as

usual, he found plenty of allies ready to join him." The

most important of the Poitevin barons, indeed, Almeric of

Thouars, was won over to John's side by the diplomacy of

* Will. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 11o. Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 160, 161.

* Rot. Chart. p. 102. 3 Zº.

* Innoc. III. Epp. 1. vi. No. 167. R. Coggeshall, p. 135, dates this

appeal a year too late. The Pope, on the authority of Philip himself, speaks of

it as having been made “more than a year before ” Philip issued his citation to

John, a citation of which the date is by other evidence fixed at the end of

March or early in April 1202.

5 Rot. Pat, vol. i. p. 2, dateless, but as the document is on the roll of

John's second year, its date must be before May 3, 1201. From its position on

the roll, it would seem to belong to October 1200.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 160; R. Coggeshall, pp. 128, 129.

I2OI


I2O1

Eleanor; but the danger appeared so great that both

Eleanor and Almeric besought John to come over and deal

with it in person as soon as he possibly could ; and at the

end of April the count of Angoulême and John's other

friends in the south proposed sending Almeric to confer

with John in England." -

John meanwhile was summoning the earls and barons

of England to meet him at Portsmouth at Whitsuntide

(May 13), ready with horses and arms to accompany him

over sea. The earls held a meeting at Leicester, and

thence unanimously sent him word that they would not go

with him “unless he gave them back their rights. For the

king, following ill counsel, was demanding their castles of

them ; and beginning with William of Aubigny, he de-

manded of him the castle of Belvoir. William satisfied

him by giving him his son as a hostage, and thus kept his

castle.”* Notwithstanding their protest, the barons brought

their forces to Portsmouth on the appointed day, equipped

for a campaign, and each man provided with the money

needful to cover his expenses during the usual term of

service in a feudal host. This, and nothing more, was pre-

cisely what John wanted them to do: “He took from some

of them the money which they would have spent in his

service, and let them return home.”* The ready money

which he thus obtained was a more useful and safer weapon

for his purpose than the host itself would have been, and no

pretext was left for the discussion of inconvenient questions.

The king immediately despatched William the Marshal and

Roger de Lacy, each at the head of a hundred mercenaries,

“to check the assaults of his enemies on the borders of

Normandy.” At the same time he appointed his chamber-

lain, Hubert de Burgh, warden of the Welsh marches, with

another hundred soldiers under his command, and sent the

bishop of Chester to William the Lion with a request that

the term fixed for answering his demands might be ex-

tended to Michaelmas.” Having taken these precautions to

1 Rot. Chart. p. 102.

* R. Howden, vol. iv. pp. 160, 161. * Ib. p. 163.

* Jö. pp. 163, 164.


secure England from attack, John again crossed the sea;

on June 2 he was at Bonneville.”

At the announcement of John's intention to return,

Philip had either compelled or persuaded the Lusignans to

suspend hostilities in Poitou.” A period of negotiation

followed; Philip remonstrating with John about his conduct

towards the Lusignans, and urging him to make them

restitution ; John, in his turn, remonstrating with Philip for

his constant aggressions and his interference with the

internal affairs of John's duchies. Several personal inter-

views seem to have taken place between the kings; * before

the end of June the treaty of Ascension-tide 1200 was

confirmed ; and on the last day of that month John, by

Philip's invitation, went to Paris, and was there lodged and

entertained for several days in the royal palace, which

Philip vacated for his convenience.”

This temporary pacification was effected by a promise

on John's part that the quarrel between him and the

Lusignans should be tried and settled fairly in his court as

duke of Aquitaine.” Towards the end of July he went to

Chinon ; there he spent the greater part of the next six

weeks,” and it was probably there that he summoned the

Lusignans to the promised trial. But meanwhile the

Lusignans had discovered that the trial which he designed

was something wholly different from that which Philip had

demanded on their behalf. John, before he left England,

had determined to appeal “the barons of Poitou.”—that is,

no doubt, the Lusignans and their friends—on a general

charge of treason against his late brother and himself, and

challenge them to ordeal of battle with a number of

champions specially chosen for the purpose. This project

was perfectly legal ; the ordeal of battle, though it was

beginning to be discountenanced by public opinion under

the influence of the Church, was still recognized as a lawful

1 Itin. a. 3. * R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 161.

* Innoc. III. Epp. 1. vi. Nos. 163, 167.

* Cf. R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 164; Rigord, c. 135 ; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p.

93; and for dates, Itin. a. 3. Rigord’s “pridie Kalendas Junii” is doubtless

a mistake for “Julii.”

* Innoc. III. Epp. l. vi. No. 167. * Itin. a. 3.

G

I2OI


I2OI

method of deciding upon a charge of treason. But a

simultaneous challenge to so large a number of men, and

men, too, of such high rank and personal distinction as the

Lusignans and their allies, was a startling innovation upon

feudal tradition and practice, and unwarranted by historical

precedent. Moreover, there was in the scheme another

feature which would make it doubly offensive to the barons

concerned. The champions against whom they were called

upon to prove their loyalty are described as “picked men,

practised in the art of duelling, whom the king had hired

and brought with him from his dominions on both sides of

the sea.”" That is, they were professional champions—

men who made a business of hiring themselves out to fight

the battles of any one who either could not or would not

fight in his own person, but who could afford to pay for an

efficient substitute. Such hired champions, of course, in

every case represented the person who hired them ; in the

present case they would have represented the king; yet

nobles like the Lusignans, two of whose brothers had been,

no less than John himself, crowned and anointed sovereigns,

could not but feel it an intolerable insult to be challenged,

even in a king's name, by creatures such as these. The

accused barons all alike refused to come to John's court,

“saying that they would answer to no one save to their

peers.”.” It seems that on a fresh remonstrance from

Philip, John again consented, or pretended to consent, to a

trial such as they demanded; but he was very unwilling to

fix a day; and when he did fix one, he refused to give the

defendants a safe conduct, without which, of course, they

would not stir from their homes.”

Again Philip intervened, and again John promised re-

dress. This time apparently Philip deemed it advisable to

require security for the fulfilment of the promise. The

security which he asked for, however, was more than John

could reasonably be expected to give ; it seems to have

been nothing less than three of the most important castles

in Normandy—those of Falaise, Arques, and “Andely,”

1 R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 176. * Iº.

* W. Brito, Philipp. 1. vi. vv. 106-43.


that is, Château-Gaillard. In December John summoned

Archbishop Hubert over from England, and sent him to

“make his excuses” to the French king;' and Hubert so

far succeeded that after Christmas John was able to venture

into Aquitaine. Early in February 1202 he met the king

of Navarre at Angoulême, and made with him a treaty of

close offensive and defensive alliance.”

It was arranged that John and Philip should hold a

conference—seemingly on March 25—at Boutavant. John,

it appears, kept, or at least was ready to keep, the appoint-

ment; but Philip either was or pretended to be afraid of

venturing into Norman territory, and would not advance

beyond Gouleton. Thither John came across the river to

meet him.” No agreement was arrived at. Finally, Philip

cited John to appear in Paris fifteen days after Easter,” at

the court of his overlord the king of France, to stand to its

judgement, to answer to his lord for his misdoings, and

undergo the sentence of his peers. The citation was ad-

dressed to John as count of Anjou and Poitou and duke of

Aquitaine;" the Norman duchy was not mentioned in it.

This omission was clearly intentional ; when John answered

the citation by reminding Philip that he was duke of Nor-

mandy, and as such, in virtue of ancient agreement between

the kings and the dukes, not bound to go to any meeting

with the king of France save on the borders of their respec-

tive territories, Philip retorted that he had summoned not

the duke of Normandy but the duke of Aquitaine, and that

his rights over the latter were not to be annulled by the

accidental union of the two dignities in one person." John

then promised that he would appear before the court in

Paris on the appointed day, and give up to Philip two

1 Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 93. Hubert crossed on December 14, R. Diceto,

vol. ii. p. 173. * Rot. Pat. vol. i. pp. 5, 6.

* Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 93; R. Diceto, vol. ii. p. 174; Rigord, c.

137; and R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 167. John was at Orival on March 23;

then there is a blank for three days, and on March 27 he appears at Les Andelys,

Itin. a. 3.

* I.e. on April 28. The date is from Rigord, c. 138.

* R. Coggeshall, pp. 135, 136. Cf. Rigord, c. 138; W. Armor. Gesta P. A.

c. I Io; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 93; and Innoc. III. Epp. 1. vi. No. 167.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 136.

I2OI

I2O2


I2O2

small castles, Thillier and Boutavant, as security for his

submitting to its decision. April 28 passed, and both

these promises remained unfulfilled." One English writer

asserts that thereupon “the assembled court of the king of

France adjudged the king of England to be deprived of all

his land which he and his forefathers had hitherto held of

the king of France”;” but there is reason to think that this

statement is erroneous, and derived from a false report put

forth by Philip Augustus for political purposes two or three

years later.” It is certain that after the date of this alleged

sentence, negotiations still went on ; “great and excellent

mediators” endeavoured to arrange a pacification ; * and

Philip himself, according to his own account, had another

interview with John, at which he used all his powers of

persuasion to bring him to submission, but in vain. Then

the French king, by the advice of his barons, formally

“defied ” his rebellious vassal ; * in a sudden burst of wrath

he ordered the archbishop of Canterbury—evidently one of

the mediators just referred to—out of his territories, and

dashing after him with such forces as he had at hand, began

hostilities by a raid upon Boutavant, which he captured and

burned." Even after this, if we may trust his own report,

he sent four knights to John to make a final attempt at

reconciliation; but John would not see them."

The war which followed was characteristic of both kings

alike. Philip's attack took the form not of a regular in-

vasion, but of a series of raids upon eastern Normandy,

whereby in the course of the next three months 8 he made

himself master of Thillier, Lions, Longchamp, La Ferté-

en-Braye, Orgueil, Gournay, Mortemer, Aumale and the

1. Rigord, c. 138; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 11o. Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol.

ii. p. 93, and Innoc. III. Epp. l. vi. No. 167.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 136.

* See “The Alleged Condemnation of King John by the Court of France in

1202,” in Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, new series, vol. xiv. (1900),

pp. 53-68.

* Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 93.

* Innoc. III. Epp. l.c.

* Cf. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 94; Rigord, c. 138; W. Armor. Gesta P. A.

c. 112 ; and R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 167.

7 Innoc. III. Epp. l.c.

8 The war had begun before May 11, Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 10.


town and county of Eu." John was throughout the same

period flitting ceaselessly about within a short distance

of all these places; * but Philip never came up with him,

and he never but once came up with Philip. On July 7

the French king laid siege to Radepont, some ten miles to

the south-east of Rouen. John, who was at Bonport, let

him alone for a week, and then suddenly appeared before

the place, whereupon Philip immediately withdrew.” John,

however, made no attempt at pursuit. According to his

wont, he let matters take their course till he saw a favourable

opportunity for retaliation. At the end of the month the

opportunity came.

At the conclusion of the treaty of Gouleton in May

12oo Arthur, after doing homage to his uncle for Britanny,

had been by him restored to the guardianship of the French

king.” The death of the boy's mother in September 1201 °

left him more than ever exposed to Philip's influence; and

it was no doubt as a measure of precaution, in view of the

approaching strife between the kings, that John on March

27, 1202—two days after his meeting with Philip at

Gouleton—summoned his “beloved nephew Arthur” to

come and “do right” to him at Argentan at the octave of

Easter." The summons probably met with no more obedi-

ence than did Philip's summons to John ; and before the

end of April Philip had bound Arthur securely to his side

by promising him the hand of his infant daughter Mary."

This promise was ratified by a formal betrothal at Gournay,

after the capture of that place by the French; at the same

time Philip made Arthur a knight, and gave him the in-

vestiture of all the Angevin dominions except Normandy.”

Towards the end of July Philip despatched Arthur, with a

1. Cf. Rigord, c. 138; W. Armor. Philipp. 1. vi. v.v. 204-20, and R.

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 167. * See Itin. a. 3, 4.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 167; for dates cf. Itin. a. 4. Gerv. Cant. vol. ii.

p. 94, places this siege too late. * R. Howden, vol. iv. p. 115.

* Chron. Britann. a. 1201, in Morice, Hist. de Bretagne, preuves, vol. i.

cols. 6, Ioff. * Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 7.

7 Delisle, Catalogue des Actes de Phil.-Aug., No. 726.

* Rigord, c. 138; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 113. Arthur's charter giving

full details of his homage to Philip is in Round, Cal, Doc. France, vol. i. p. 475.

Date, Gournay, July 1202.

I2O2


i2O2

force of two hundred French knights, to join the Lusignans

in an attack on Poitou. The barons of Britanny and of

Berry had been summoned to meet him at Tours; but the

only allies who did meet him there were three of the Lusig-

nans and Savaric de Mauléon, with some three hundred

knights. Overruling the caution of the boy duke, who wished

to wait for reinforcements from his own duchy, the im-

petuous southerners urged an immediate attack upon Mire-

beau, their object being to capture Queen Eleanor, who was

known to be there, and whom they rightly regarded as the

mainstay of John's power in Aquitaine. Eleanor, however,

became aware of their project in time to despatch a letter

to her son, begging him to come to her rescue. He was

already moving southward when her courier met him on

July 30 as he was approaching Le Mans. By marching

day and night he and his troops covered the whole distance

between Le Mans and Mirebeau—eighty miles at the least

—in forty-eight hours, and appeared on August 1 before

the besieged castle.” The enemies had already taken the

outer ward and thrown down all the gates save one, deem-

ing their own valour a sufficient safeguard against John's

expected attack.” So great was their self-confidence that

they even marched out to meet him. Like most of those

who at one time or another fought against John, they

underrated the latent capacities of their adversary. They

were driven back into the castle, hotly pursued by his

troops, who under the guidance of William des Roches

forced their way in after the fugitives, and were in a short

time masters of the place. The whole of the French and

Poitevin forces were either slain or captured; and among

the prisoners were the three Lusignans, and Arthur."

1. Cf. Rigord, c. 138; W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 113, and Philipp. l.

vi. vv. 262-389; R. Coggeshall, p. 137; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 94, and R.

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 168.

* Dates from John's own letter, in R. Coggeshall, pp. 137, 138. Cf. R.

Wendover, vol. iii. p. 169.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 137.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 138; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 169; Rigord, c. 138;

W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 113. This last has another version in his later and

less trustworthy work, the Philippis, 1. vi. vv. 390-450. See also Hist, des Ducs

de Mormandie (ed. Michel, Soc. de l’Hist, de France), pp. 93-95.


III Johny “SoFTsword" 87

Philip was at that moment busy with the siege of

Arques; on the receipt of these tidings he left it and turned

southward," but he failed, or perhaps did not attempt, to

intercept John, who, bringing his prisoners with him, made

his way leisurely back to Falaise.” There he imprisoned

Arthur in the castle,” and despatched his victorious troops

against Arthur's duchy; they captured Dol and Fougères,

and harried the country as far as Rennes.* Philip, after

ravaging Touraine, fired the city of Tours and took the

citadel; immediately afterwards he withdrew to his own

territories, as by that time John was again at Chinon. As

soon as Philip was gone, John in his turn entered Tours

and wrested the citadel from the French garrison left there

by his rival; but his success was won at the cost of another

conflagration which, an English chronicler declares, was

never forgiven him by the citizens and the barons of

Touraine."

For the moment, however, he was in luck. In Aquitaine

he seemed in a fair way to carry all before him without

striking a blow. Angoulême had passed into his hands by

the death of his father-in-law on June 17." Guy of

Limoges had risen in revolt again, but at the end of August

or early in September he was captured.” The Lusignans,

from their prison at Caen, made overtures for peace, and

by dint of protestations and promises succeeded ere long in

regaining their liberty, of course on the usual conditions of

surrendering their castles and giving hostages for their

loyalty.” It was almost equally a matter of course that as

* Rigord, c. 138; R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 169.

* He reached Falaise on August 1o, Itin. a. 4.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 17o; W. Armor. Philipp. 1. vi. vv. 455, 456.

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 12o. In Philipp. 1. vi. ww. 343-6, he dates

this expedition earlier. In both works he speaks as if John had headed it in

person, but the Itin. a. 3, 4, shows that this was not the case.

* W. Armor. Gesta P. A. c. 114; R. Coggeshall, p. 138. John was at

Chinon August 20-21, at Tours August 22-23, at Chinon again August 24-29,

and at Tours again August 30-September I, Itin. a. 4.

* Rer. Gall. Script. vol. xviii. p. 799.

7 Rigord, c. 138. Cf. Rot. Pat. vol. i. p. 18.

* R. Coggeshall, p. 138; Hist. de G. le Mar. ww. 12531-35. - Ralf of Eu

was set free before November 7, 1202, Hugh and Geoffrey before January 17,

1203 ; Rot. Pat, vol. i. pp. 20, 23.

i2O2


I2O2

soon as they were free they began intriguing against John."

But the chronic intrigues of the south were in reality, as

John himself seems to have discovered, a far less serious

danger than the disaffection in his northern dominions.

This last evil was undoubtedly, so far as Normandy was

concerned, owing in great measure to John's own fault. He

had entrusted the defence of the Norman duchy to his

mercenaries under the command of a Provençal captain

whose real name is unknown, who seems to have adopted

for himself the nickname of “Lou Pescaire,” “The Fisher-

man”—which the Normans apparently corrupted into

“Louvrekaire"—and who habitually treated his employer's

peaceable subjects in a fashion in which other commanders

would have shrunk from treating avowed enemies.” Side by

side with the discontent thus caused among the people there

was a rapid growth of treason among the Norman barons;–

treason fraught with far greater peril than the treason of the

nobles of Aquitaine, because it was more persistent and more

definite in its aim ; because it was at once less visible and

tangible and more deeply rooted; because it spread in

silence and wrought in darkness; and because, while no

southern rebel ever really fought for anything but his own

hand, the northern traitors were in close concert with Philip

Augustus. John knew not whom to trust; he could, in

fact, trust no one; and herein lay the explanation of his

restless movements, his unaccountable wanderings, his habit

of journeying through bye-ways, his constant changes of

plan.” Moreover, besides the Aquitanian rebels, the Norman

traitors, and the French enemy, there were the Breton

partizans of Arthur to be reckoned with. These had now

found a leader in William des Roches, who, when he saw

that he could not prevail upon John to set Arthur at liberty,

openly withdrew from the king's service, and organized a

league of the Breton nobles against him.

These Bretons, reinforced by some barons from Anjou

* Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 12536-50.

* Ib. vv. 12595-606. On the name see M. Delaborde's note, CEuvres de

A'igord et de Guillaume le Breton, vol. ii. p. 282.

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 12569-84; Gerv. Cant. vol. ii. p. 95.


and Maine, succeeded on October 29 in gaining possession

of Angers." It may have been to watch for an opportunity

of dislodging them that John, who was then at Le Mans,

went to spend a fortnight at Saumur and another at Chinon.

Early in December, however, he fell back upon Normandy,”

and while the intruders were harrying his ancestral counties

with fire and sword,” he kept Christmas with his queen at

Caen, “faring sumptuously every day, and prolonging his

morning slumbers till dinner-time.” “ It seems that shortly

afterwards the queen returned to Chinon, and that in the

middle of January 1203 the enemies at Angers were dis-

covered to be planning an attempt to capture her there.

John hurried to Le Mans, only stopping at Alençon to dine

with Count Robert and endeavour to secure his suspected

loyalty by confirming him in all his possessions. No sooner

had they parted, however, than Robert rode off to the French

court, did homage to Philip, and admitted a French garrison

into Alençon. While John, thus placed between two fires,

was hesitating whether to go on or to go back, Peter des

Préaux succeeded in getting the queen out of Chinon and

bringing her to her husband at Le Mans; thence they

managed to make their way back in safety to Falaise.”

* R. Coggeshall, p. 139. Date from Chron. S. Albini, a. 1202.

* /tin. a. 4. * R. Coggeshall, l.c. * R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 171.

* Hist. de G. le Mar. vv. 12585-662. The writer appears to date this

affair in autumn 1202; and the Itinerary, a. 4, shows that John did in fact go

from Alençon to Le Mans on October 29, 1202. But the rest of the story is irre-

concileable with John's subsequent movements. The only documentary evidence

which I have found as to the date of Count Robert's treason is unluckily not

decisive; it is a charter of John, given “apud Beccum, xx die Aprilis anno regni

nostri quarto, quo comes Robertus Sagiensis fecit nobis proditionem apud

Alenconem" (Round, Cal. Doc. France, vol. i. p. 131). John in the fourth

year of his reign made three visits to Alençon besides the one already mentioned;

viz. one on December 7, 1202, and two in January 1203. The first of these

two January visits is probably the one recorded by D'Erlée. John was at

Alençon January 15-19, at Le Mans January 21-23, and at Alençon again

January 25 (Itin. a. 4). D'Erlée indeed asserts that the king on his return

from Le Mans

“Ne s'en vint pas par Alençon ;

N'i passast unques sanz tençon

Anceis qu'il venist en sa terre ;

Aileors ala passage quere;

Par Mamerz et par Belesmeis

S'en vint en sa terre li reis” (vv. 12657-62).

It seems, however, possible to reconcile this with the dates as given in the

I2O2

I2O3

*




1203

This incident may have suggested to John that it was

time to take some decisive step towards getting rid of

Arthur's claims. According to one English chronicler, some

of the king's counsellors had already been urging this matter

upon him for some time past. They pointed out that so

long as Arthur lived, and was neither physically nor legally

incapacitated for ruling, the Bretons would never be quiet,

and no lasting peace with France would be possible; and

they therefore suggested to the king a horrible scheme for

rendering Arthur incapable of being any longer a source of

danger. The increasing boldness of the Bretons at last

provoked John into consenting to this project, and he

despatched three of his servants to Falaise to put out the

eyes of the captive. Two of these men chose to leave the

king's service rather than obey him; the third went to

Falaise as he was bidden, but found it impossible to fulfil

his errand ; Arthur's struggles were backed by the very

soldiers who guarded him, and the fear of a mutiny drove

their commander, Hubert de Burgh, to prevent the execution

of an order which he felt that the king would soon have

cause to regret. He gave out, however, that the order had

been fulfilled, and that Arthur had died in consequence.

The effect of this announcement proved at once the wisdom

of Hubert and the folly of those to whose counsel John had

yielded. The fury of the Bretons became boundless; they

vowed never to leave a moment's peace to the tyrant who

had committed such a ghastly crime upon their duke, his

own nephew ; and Hubert soon found it necessary, for

John's own sake, to confess his fraud and demonstrate to

friends and foes alike that Arthur was still alive and un-

injured." John himself now attempted to deal with Arthur

in another way. Being at Falaise at the end of January

1203,” he caused his nephew to be brought before him, and

“addressed him with fair words, promising him great honours

if he would forsake the king of France and cleave faithfully

Itinerary by supposing that, as he had an escort of “granz gens e rotiers,” he

may have ventured close up to Alençon, perhaps with an idea of surprising it,

but turned away again immediately. The Itinerary shows him at Séez on January

25-28, at Argentan on 28-30, and at Falaise 30-31.

* R. Coggeshall, pp. 139-41. * /tin. a. 4.


to his uncle and rightful lord.” Arthur, however, rejected

these overtures with scorn, vowing that there should be no

peace unless the whole Angevin dominions, including

England, were surrendered to him as Richard's lawful heir.

John retorted by transferring his prisoner from Falaise to

Rouen and confining him, more strictly than ever, in the

citadel.1

Thenceforth Arthur disappears from history. What was

his end no one knows. The chronicle of the abbey of

Margan in South Wales, a chronicle of which the only

known manuscript ends with the year 1232, and of which

the portion dealing with the early years of John's reign was

not compiled in its present form till after 1221 at earliest,

asserts that on Maunday Thursday (April 3) 1203, John,

“after dinner, being drunk and possessed by the devil,”

slew his nephew with his own hand and tied a great stone

to the body, which he flung into the Seine; that a fisher-

man's net brought it up again, and that, being recognized, it

was buried secretly, “for fear of the tyrant,” in the church

of Notre-Dame-des-Prés, near Rouen.” William the Breton,

in his poem on Philip Augustus, completed about 1216,

relates in detail, but without date, how John took Arthur

out alone with him by night in a boat on the Seine,

plunged a sword into his body, rowed along for three miles

with the corpse, and then threw it overboard.” Neither of

these writers gives any authority for his story. The earliest

authority of precisely ascertained date to which we can trace

the assertion that Arthur was murdered is a document put

forth by a personage whose word, on any subject whatever,

is as worthless as the word of John himself—King Philip

Augustus of France. In 1216—about the time when his

Breton historiographer's poem was completed — Philip

affected to regard it as a notorious fact that John had, either

in person or by another's hand, murdered his nephew. But

Philip at the same time went on to assert that John had

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 170. Cf. R. Coggeshall, p. 143. -

* Ann. Margan. a. 1204; the annalist, however, clearly meant to date the

event 1203. On the value of his authority see Bémont, Revue historique, vol.

xxxii. (1886), p. 59.

* W. Armor. Philipp. 1. vi. vv. 552-66.

1203


I2O3

been summoned to trial before the supreme court of France,

and by it condemned to forfeiture of all his dominions, on

that same charge of murder; and this latter assertion is

almost certainly false." Seven months after the date

assigned by the Margan annalist to Arthur's death—in

October 1203—Philip owned himself ignorant whether the

duke of Britanny were alive or not.” Clearly, therefore, it

was not as the avenger of Arthur's murder that Philip took

the field at the end of April. On the other hand, Philip

had never made the slightest attempt to obtain Arthur's

release; early in I2O3, if not before, he was almost openly

laying his plans in anticipation of Arthur's permanent

effacement from politics.” The interests of the French king

were in fact no less concerned in Arthur's imprisonment, and

more concerned in his death, than were the interests of John

himself. John's one remaining chance of holding Philip and

the Bretons in check was to keep them in uncertainty

whether Arthur were alive or dead, in order to prevent the

Bretons from adopting any decided policy, and hamper the

French king in his dealings with them and with the Angevin

and Poitevin rebels by compelling him to base his alliance

with them on conditions avowedly liable to be annulled at

any moment by Arthur's reappearance on the political

scene. 