In the spring of 1207 William

the Marshal asked leave of John to visit his Irish lands,

which he had never yet seen. The leave was given, though

* The Four Masters, a. 1205, describe the war as “between the English of

Meath and the English of Meiler”; but the only “English of Meath" who took

part in it seem to have been Walter de Lacy and his personal followers. See

Rot. Pat. p. 69 (February 21, 1206), where John commends the barons of

Meath and Leinster for not having supported Walter in his strife with Meiler

about Limerick.

* Aot. Claus. vol. i. p. 47 b.

* Rot. Pat. pp. 69 b, 7ob.

* His father was son of Henry I. by Nest, daughter of Rees ap Griffith,

prince of North Wales. Gir. Cambr. vol. i. p. 59.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. p. 356.

." Two cantreds in Kerry—“Akunkerry” and “Hyerba”—and one “in

terra de Corch”—“Yogenacht Lokhelen quae est terra de Humurierdach *—to

be holden by the service of fifteen knights. Rot. Chart. p. 77 b.

* Gir. Cambr. vol. v. pp. 355, 356.

L

1205

1207

March

April


12O7

unwillingly; but as William was on the point of setting out

from Striguil, he was overtaken by a message from the king,

bidding him either remain in England, or give his second

son as a hostage. William sent the boy back with the

messenger, saying that the king might have all his children

as hostages if he pleased, but as for himself, he was deter-

mined to go to Ireland; and next day he sailed. His

coming was far from welcome to the justiciar, who till then

had been without a superior in the country, and who resented

alike the necessity of doing homage to the Marshal for the

land which he held under him, and the probability of his

own importance being overshadowed by the presence of a

man whose territorial and personal weight was so much

greater than his own. Meiler therefore wrote to the king

urging him to recall the Marshal. John did so, but bade

Meiler himself come over at the same time. The Marshal,

though feeling that mischief was in prospect, obeyed the

king's summons with his usual readiness, and returned to

England at Michaelmas, leaving his wife with a band of

trusty followers to defend Leinster in his stead. Meiler also

came, after secretly bidding his kinsmen and friends attack

the Marshal's lands as soon as he was gone, which they did

the very next week. The king gave Meiler a warm

welcome, but treated the Marshal with coldness and dis-

pleasure,” which Meiler soon found a way to increase.

At the beginning of the year the justiciar had seized for

the Crown some of the lands, men and goods of William de

Braose.” His excuse for this proceeding was probably the

fact that De Braose was in debt to the Crown for the ferm of

the city of Limerick, and also for no less than four thousand

two hundred and ninety-eight marks of the five thousand

which he had in January I2O I covenanted to pay, by instal-

ments of five hundred every year, for the grant of the honour

of Limerick.” Meiler, however, had acted without instructions

from the king; and when De Braose complained of the

1 He had had the eldest son ever since July 1205; Hist. G. le Mar, vv.

13271-6.

* Ib. v.v. 1331 I-20, 13350-584.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 77 b. * See Note I. at end.


treatment which he had received, John declared that he

“found no fault in him,” and bade Meiler restore everything

that had been taken from him, unless indeed the city of

Limerick was included ; if that had been seized for the

Crown, Meiler was to retain it till further orders." The

mingled feelings of the king are reflected in his letter.

John had found in William de Braose a useful servant and

friend ; he knew that he might find in him a dangerous

enemy; he was therefore reluctant to take any measures

which might drive William into opposition. On the other

hand, William's neglect of his pecuniary obligations to the

Crown had reached such a pass that it could hardly be

ignored much longer; and William was further suspected of

being in secret alliance against the king, both with the

Welsh and with the De Lacys.” Of this suspicion the king

seems to have known nothing till after the middle of July,

when he reappointed “our beloved and faithful William de

Braose.” custodian of Ludlow Castle.” It had, however,

reached his ears by the time of Meiler's coming to England,

and Meiler turned it to account for a double purpose of his

own. One day, as the king and his chief counsellors sat

talking together after dinner, something was said about

William the Marshal and his friendly relations with William

de Braose. Meiler wrought upon the king's jealousy of the

one and his suspicions of the other, till he persuaded him to

join in a plot for bringing them both to ruin.

At the justiciar's instigation John secretly despatched

letters to all those of the Marshal's followers in Ireland who

held lands in England, bidding them, on pain of forfeiting

these, to be at his court within a fortnight. At the same

time Meiler, with the king's licence, returned to Ireland.

* Rot. Claus. p. 77 b.

* W. Coventry, vol. ii. p. 202.

* Rot. Pat. p. 74. Walter de Lacy, on his marriage with Margaret de

Braose, had promised that he would never give, sell, or pledge any part of his

land in England or Normandy without his father-in-law's consent; and this

engagement had been embodied in a charter and confirmed by the king. Rot.

Obl. (a. 2 Joh.), p. 81. One of its results seems to have been that De Braose

took charge of Ludlow Castle; it was he who on March 5, 1206, was summoned

to deliver it up to Philip d'Aubigné for the king ; Rot. Pat. p. 69 b. On July

13, 1207, John transferred its custody from D'Aubigné back to De Braose.

1207

Feb. 12


The Marshal asked permission to do the same ; but this

was refused. Meiler on his arrival found that hitherto his

men had, on the whole, been worsted in their strife with

those of Leinster. He now summoned the Marshal's men to

a “parliament,” at which the king's messenger read out the

secret letters. The men to whom these letters were addressed

saw but too plainly what would be the result of their

obedience: the Marshal's lands would be left without

defence against Meiler. They unanimously resolved to

sacrifice their own English estates, disobey the king for

their lord's sake, and resist Meiler to the uttermost ; and

with the help of two powerful neighbours whom they called

to their aid, Ralph Fitz-Payne and Hugh de Lacy, they

succeeded, as one of them says, in doing to Meiler as much

mischief as he had thought to do to their lord." The

Marshal, meanwhile, was compelled to remain at court, but

so discountenanced by the king that hardly any one dared

to speak to him. At last, one winter day, as they rode out

from Guildford,” John called to him : “Marshal, have you

had any news from Ireland that pleases you?” “No, sire.”

“I can tell you some news,” said the king, laughing ; and

he told him that his wife, the Countess Isabel, had been

besieged in Kilkenny by Meiler, who had indeed been at

length worsted and even captured by her people, but with

very heavy losses on her side, three of the Marshal's chief

friends being among the slain. The story was a sheer

invention of John's ; in reality he had received no news

from Ireland at all. The Marshal, though perplexed and

troubled, retained his outward composure; and early in the

spring he himself received from Ireland a very different

account of what had happened there. The justiciar had

not only been captured, but had made submission to the

countess and given his son as a hostage till he himself

should stand to right in her husband's court for the wrong

which he had done to him as his lord.

These tidings were sent at the same time to the king,

1207

1208

1 Hist, de G. le Mar. vv. 13589-786.

* John was at Guildford December 27 to 28, 1207, and January 25 to 27,

1208; ſtin. a. 9.


IV. RING JOHN 149

who was by no means pleased with them, but characteristic-

ally changed his policy at once to meet the turn of the

tide. He called the Marshal to his presence, greeted him

with unusual courtesy, and asked him if he had heard any-

thing from Ireland. “No, sire; I have no news from

thence.” “Then I will tell you some good news, of which I

wish you joy.”—and thereupon John related the truth, which

William knew already, though he had not chosen to say so.

From that time forth “the king made him as good cheer as

he had made him evil cheer before ”; and when the Marshal

soon afterwards again asked leave to go to Ireland, it was

granted at once." On March 7 Meiler was ordered to

refrain from interfering with the lands of the Marshal, who

had instructed his men to keep the peace towards Meiler in

return; * on March 20 John informed the justiciar that

“the Marshal has done our will,” and despatched to Ireland

four commissioners by whose instructions Meiler was to act,

and who, if he failed to do so, were empowered to act in his

stead.” On the 28th, a new grant of Leinster, on the terms

of the original grant to Richard de Clare, was made by the

king to the Marshal." A month later Meath was in like

manner granted afresh to Walter de Lacy;" and at the end

of the next year, 1209, Meiler was removed from his office of

justiciar, and replaced by the bishop of Norwich,John de Grey."

On one point, however, Meiler was justified by the king.

In the spring of 1208 John made up his mind to bear with

William de Braose no longer, and ordered a distraint upon

his Welsh lands. William's wife, Maud of Saint-Valery,’

---w

1208

1209

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 13787-936.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 105. * Ib. p. 106 b.

* Rot. Chart. p. 176.

* Ib. p. 178. Cf. Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 106.

* The bishop of Norwich was in Ireland before January 2, 1210 (Rot. Misae,

p. 144); Meiler had ceased to be justiciar before February 16 of the same year

(ib. p. 149); and the bishop was in office as justiciar when the De Braoses

arrived in Ireland towards the end of 1209, as appears from Hist. de G. le Mar.

vv. 141 19-172. The Four Masters’ account of Bishop John's appointment

and its consequences is too amusing to be omitted. They say under the year

1208: “John, bishop of Norwich, was sent by the king of England into Ireland

as lord justice; and the English were excommunicated by the successor of S.

Peter for sending the bishop to carry on war in Ireland.”

* The king speaks of her as Maud de la Haye, Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 107.

But she witnesses a charter of her husband by the title of “domina Matiltis de

1208


1208

1209

his nephew, Earl William of Ferrars, and his sister's hus-

band, Adam de Port, met the king at Gloucester and

persuaded him to grant an interview to William himself at

Hereford. William promised to pay his debts to the trea-

sury within a certain time, pledged some of his castles for

the payment, and gave three of his grandsons and four other

persons as hostages." Roger of Wendover relates that when

the king's officers went to fetch the hostages, Maud refused

to deliver up her grandchildren to the king, “because,” said

she, “he has murdered his captive nephew"; that her

husband reproved her, and declared himself willing to answer

according to law for anything in which he had offended the

king; and that John, on hearing what Maud had said, was

“greatly perturbed,” and ordered the whole family of De

Braose to be arrested.” John himself, in a public statement

attested by the chief justiciar of England and twelve other

men of high position, among whom were De Braose's own

nephew and brother-in-law, asserted that shortly after the

meeting at Hereford De Braose and his sons attempted to

regain the pledged castles by force, and when they had

failed in this attempt, attacked and burned Leominster.”

Thereupon it seems that William was proclaimed a traitor;

on September 21 John empowered Gerald of Athies to

make an agreement with all who were or had been homagers

of William de Braose, so that they should “come to the

king's service and not return to the service of William.” “

De Braose was chased by the king's officers,” till in the

following year, 1209, he escaped, with his wife and two of

their sons, from some Welsh seaport, intending to go to

Ireland. A violent storm kept them tossing on the sea for

Sancto Walerico,” Round, Cal. Doc. France, vol. i. p. 461. See the curious

account of her—“fille fu Bernard de Saint Waleri,” etc.—in Hist. des Ducs de

Mormandie, pp. I I I, I 12.

1 Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 107. John was at Gloucester in 1208 April

22 and 23, and at Hereford April 24 to 28; ſtin. a. 9. º

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 225. He brings in this story in connexion with

the general demand for hostages from the barons in 1208; but his own account

of the words used by William de Braose shows that he was aware there was a

special ground for the demand in De Braose's case.

* Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 108.

* Rot. Pat. p. 86 b. * Foedera, l.c.







IRE LAND

A.D. 1210.

London: Macmillan & Co.,Ltd.

Stanford's Geog'Estañº London,




three days and three nights; at last they landed at Wicklow.

William the Marshal chanced to be there; he received them

kindly and sheltered them for three weeks. Then their

presence was discovered by the new justiciar, Bishop John

de Grey, who at once taxed the Marshal with harbouring

“the king's traitors,” and bade him give them up to justice.

The Marshal refused, saying he had only received “his lord,” "

as he was bound to do, and without knowing that De Braose

had incurred the king's displeasure; and he added that he

himself would not act like a traitor towards De Braose at

the justiciar's bidding. Thereupon he sent the refugees

safely on to their destination, the home of De Braose's son-

in-law, Walter de Lacy. The justiciar complained to the

king, who summoned his host for an expedition to Ireland;”

both the Marshal and the Lacys having positively refused

to give up De Braose, though they offered to be answerable

for his going to England to satisfy the king within a fixed

time, and promised that, if he failed to do so, they would

then harbour him no more. At last—seemingly in the

spring of 12 Io—De Braose was allowed to go on these

conditions back to Wales. John had apparently consented

to meet him at Hereford ; but when De Braose reached

Hereford, “he.” says the king, “regarded us not,” but began

to collect all the forces he could muster against the Crown.

His nephew, the earl of Ferrars, however, managed to bring

him to a meeting with the king at Pembroke. He offered

a fine of forty thousand marks. “We,” says John, “told him

we knew well that he was not in his own power at all, but

in that of his wife, who was in Ireland; and we proposed

that he should go to Ireland with us, and the matter should

be settled there; but he chose rather to remain in Wales,”

and was suffered to do so—John being determined now to

settle matters not only with Maud de Braose, but with all

1 “Mès j'ai herbergiémon seignor, Si comme faire le deveie,” Hist. de G, le

Mar. vv. 14214-15. How De Braose was “lord” of the Marshal, I can find

nothing to show.

* Ib. v.v. 14137-52.

s Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 108. John was at Cross-by-the-Sea, close to

Pembroke, from June 3 to June 16 inclusive, and at Crook on June 20. Itin.

a. I2,

1209

I2 iO


i2+o.

the barons of the Irish March, according to his own will and

pleasure.

At some date between June 16 and 20 John crossed

from Pembroke to Crook, near Waterford. Thence he

proceeded by way of Newbridge and Thomastown to

Kilkenny, where he and all his host were received and enter-

tained for two days (June 23 and 24) by William the

Marshal." On June 28 the king reached Dublin; thence

he led his host into Meath.” Walter de Lacy and the De

Braoses fled, evidently into Ulster; thither John marched in

pursuit of them, but before he could overtake them they

had escaped over sea into Galloway.” Hugh de Lacy had

retired into the stronghold of Carrickfergus; at the king's

approach, however, he, too, slipped away in a little boat to

Scotland." Carrickfergus was provisioned for a siege, but

its garrison was soon frightened into surrender.” While

John was at Carrickfergus, his “friend and cousin,” Duncan

of Carrick, sent him word that he had captured Maud de

Braose, one of her daughters, her eldest son, his wife and

their two children; her younger son, Reginald, had escaped,

and so had the Lacys. The king despatched John de

Courcy (whom he had taken back into favour, and brought

with him to Ireland, as likely to be a willing and useful

helper against the De Lacys) to fetch the captives from

Galloway. When they were brought before him, Maud

offered the surrender of all her husband's lands and a fine

of forty thousand marks, which John accepted ; but three

days later she repudiated her agreement." Taking his

prisoners with him, the king turned southward again, and

soon completed the subjugation of the Lacys’ territories.

Most of the lesser barons fled before him as their lords

had done, “fearing to fall into his hands.” A week's stay

* Cf. Itin. a. 12 and Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 14259-66.

* June 30, Greenoge ; July 2 and 3, Trim ; July 4 and 5, Kells. Itin.

a. f Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. Io8.

* Ann. Cambr. a. 1210, Rolls edition, pp. 66, 67, note.

* Hist. de G. le Mar, vv. 14270-78. John was at Carrickfergus July 19 to

28; Itin. a. 12.

* Foedera, l.c.

" R. Wendover, vol. iii. p. 234.


--

in Dublin (August 18 to 24) brought his expedition to

a close.”

It was probably during this second stay of John's at

Dublin that, as Roger of Wendover says, “there came to

him there more than twenty kinglets* of that country, who

all, terrified with a very great fear, did him homage and

fealty; yet a few kinglets neglected to come, who scorned

to do so, because they dwelt in impregnable places. Also

he caused to be set up there English laws and customs,

establishing sheriffs and other officers who should judge the

people of that realm according to English laws.” “ This

latter statement of Roger's may have given rise to the later

belief that it was John who organized the administration of

the March in Ireland after the English model, by dividing

the whole of the conquered territory into counties, each

under its own sheriff.” It appears, however, that there were

sheriffs in Ireland in the days of Henry II." The earliest

known mention of a sheriff's district there occurs in 1205,

when we hear of the “county of Waterford.”" Ten years

later the same county is mentioned again, and also that of

Cork;" and before the end of the century ten counties, at

least, were recognized by the English government in Ireland.”

* His itinerary from Carrickfergus is : July 29, Holywood; July 31,

Ballymore; August 2, 3, Down; 4, Banbridge ; 5, Carlingford; 8, 9, Drogheda ;

9, Io, Duleek; Io, I I, Kells; 11, Fowre; 12, Granard; I4, Rathwire; 16,

Castle Bret; 18-24, Dublin. Itin. a. 12.

* “Reguli.” The Hist, des Ducs de Normandie, pp. 112, 113, tells how the

king of Connaught came to John’s “service” at Dublin, and how John while at

Carrickfergus tried to catch the king of “ Kenelyon” in a trap, but was out-

witted by the Irishman.

* R. Wendover, vol. iii. pp. 233, 234. -

* This assertion, adopted by many modern writers, seems to have been first

definitely made by Sir John Davies, in his Discoverie of the true causes why

Ireland was never entirely subdued, etc. (1612), p. 121 : “King John made xii.

shires in Leinster and Mounster; namely, Dublin, Kildare, Meth, Uriel, Cather-

logh, Kilkenny, Wexford, Waterford, Corke, Limeric, Kerrie, and Tipperary.”

* Ware, Antiq. c. v. p. 33. -

* Patent granted by John to the citizens of Waterford, July 3, a. r. 7 (I2O5),

according to Ware, l.c.

* Rot. Claus. vol. i. p. 218.

* Writs for a parliament held at some date between 1293 and 1298 were

addressed to the sheriffs of Dublin, Louth, Kildare, Waterford, Tipperary, Cork,

Limerick, Kerry, “Connaught,” and Roscommon, and to the seneschals of the

liberties of Meath, Wexford, Carlow, Kilkenny and Ulster. Irish Archaeological

Society's Miscellany, p. 15.

I2 Io


I2 IO

The names of the earliest Irish counties thus known to us

and the circumstances of John's visit to Ireland in 12 Io may

suggest a clue to the rise and growth of the shire-system

in that country. The district which forms the present county

of Waterford had never been enfeoffed either by Henry II.

or by John, but remained directly in the hands of the supreme

ruler of the March. Of the present county Cork, the eastern

half, at least, escheated together with the rest of Raymond

FitzGerald's share of the “kingdom of Cork” on his death

about 1 185. No notice of a new enfeoffment of any of the

lands which had been his occurs till 1208, and then they

were not granted as a whole; so far as we know, only a

portion of them was enfeoffed, and that portion was dis-

tributed among several feoffees." It seems probable that

the system of county administration may have been first

established in Ireland in those districts which were under

the direct rule of the English Crown (or, to speak more

exactly, of the “English,” or Angevin, “Lord of Ireland ”),

and of which the continuous extent was too great for them

to be left, like the single cantreds attached to the other sea-

port towns, under the control of a mere military governor

or constable, and that it was only by degrees introduced

into the great fiefs. If this were so, the events of 12 Io

would furnish an excellent opportunity for its extension.

Of the four great fiefs which, together with the royal

domains and the lately redistributed honour of Cork, made

up the “English" March in Ireland, Leinster was, when

John sailed from Dublin for England at the end of August,”

practically the only one left. Meath, Ulster, and Limerick

were all forfeit to the Crown ; and the Crown kept the greater

part of them for many years after. Meath was not restored

to Walter de Lacy till 1215; * Walter's brother, the earl of

Ulster, did not return from exile till after John's death;4

* Rot. Chart. pp. 171 b, 172, 172 b. Cf. an inquisition ordered April 3, 1206

(Rot. 