Si' 
 
 us, 
 
 

<#PG# 0>
'» ** 
 

<#PG# 1>
^hit ^ihu 
 
 'iinjri/ ^/^ 
 
 [HP 
 

<#PG# 2>
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
 in 2011 with funding from 
 Duke University Libraries 
 
 http://www.archive.org/details/historyofmissbet01hayw 
 

<#PG# 3>


<#PG# 4>

<#PG# 5>
THE 
 
 HISTORY 
 
 / // 
 
 Mifs Betjy Thoughtlefs, 
 
 In Two Volumes. 
 V O L. I. 
 
 
 I) V B L J N: 
 
 printed for R O B E R T MAIN, BooigVIIcr, 
 in Dame-^reet, oppofite Foivmis-Jireeu 
 
 M;DCC;LII. 
 

<#PG# 6>
r^vi. m 
 
 ,\>v\V\;^ft^ iU 
 

<#PG# 7>
CONTENTS 
 
 To the Firft Volume. 
 
 CHAP. I. 
 
 GIVE S the reader room to guefs at ivbat is to mfuey 
 though ten tv one but he jindshitnfelf .deceived, p. I 
 CHAP. II. 
 Shzvs fnifs Betfy in a kexu fcene of iifc^ and the frequent 
 opportunities Jhc had of putting in pra^icc thofe hfons 
 J he n.vas hegiiming to receive from her young injlruclrcfs 
 at the boarding fchool. 6 
 
 CHAP. III. 
 Affhrds fnattcr of con dp lance, . or raillety, according to the 
 humour the reader happens to he in for cither. i 5 
 
 CHAP. IV. 
 Verifies the oid proverb , that one afli^ion treads r/pc^n ih?. 
 . heels of another . 2 ; 
 
 CHAP. V. 
 Contains nothing very extraordinary^ yet fuch thir.gs a: avf. 
 highly proper to be knon.vn. 5 o 
 
 C H A P. \l. 
 May he of fotne feri-ice to jhe ladies, cfpecially the younger 
 .fort, if ifjell attended to. 3-T 
 
 CHAP. VII. 
 Is a mcdlty of various particulars, iK-hich pave the ^cvay 
 for matters ef more confcqucnce. A.Z 
 
 C HA P. VIII. * ' 
 
 ( Relates hon.v, by a concurrence of odd circumfiaKccs^ Tnifs 
 Betly v:as brought pretty near the' crifs of her fate, cmd 
 the means by v:hich Jhe efcapcd. /o 
 
 C H A P. IX. 
 t^oirti. ins fuch things as might be reafonahly expe^ed, after 
 the prccidi-ig adventure. 61 
 
 C H A P. X. 
 Gives the cafafirophe of the Oxfird ra??jblc, and in v:hat 
 mannei- the ladies return to London. ' yo 
 
 CHAP. XI. 
 Lays a foundation for ma77y evatts to be produced by time, 
 and ivaited for ^.dth patience^ - - - 76 
 
 A 2 C H A ? 
 
 \t' f 
 5^ C^t 
 

<#PG# 8>
il CONTENTS. 
 
 CHAP. XTI.. ,. 
 /; little more than a conthmance of the former. 84 
 
 CHAP. Xill. 
 
 Contains fome fart of the hijlory of Mfs For-ward'' s ad- 
 
 <venturesy from the time of her lea-ving the boarding 
 
 Schooly as rdatedhy hcrfelf to Mifs Betfy. . «4, 
 
 CHAP. XIV. ^ Jj) 
 
 t.mtludes mifs To7^oard''s narrative, and relates fome fuT' 
 
 ther particulars of mifs ^etfys beba<viour, on hearing a 
 
 detail Jhe Jg little expeded. 104. 
 
 C H A P. XV. 
 
 IBrings many things on the carpet, highly plcajing to mifs 
 
 Betfy in their beginningy and no lefs perplexing to her in 
 
 their confcquences. I To 
 
 C H A P. XVL 
 
 Prefents the reader fivith the naine and eharader of mifs 
 Betfy s third lovers and alfo n,mthfotne other particulars^ 
 
 C A H P. xvir. 
 
 Is of lefs importance than the former^ yet muji net h 
 
 emitted. 135 
 
 CHAP. XVIII. 
 
 Treats on no frejh matters, hut fer'ves to heighten thofe 
 
 already mentioned. 145 
 
 CHAP. XIX. 
 
 Will make the reader little the <vcifer. 1 55 
 
 C H A P. XX. 
 Contains an odd accident^ nvhich happened to m/fs Betfey in 
 the cloillers of W^efl7ninlier'ahhex. 1 62 
 
 ^ ^ CHAP. XXI. 
 Ql'ves anExplancition of the former ^ imth other particulars^ 
 more agreeable to the reader in the repetition, than to the 
 tcrfans concerned in them. ' ^ 1 7^ 
 
 C H A P. XXII. 
 One duel began ^ and another fought in the fame morning, 
 on mil) Betfy s account, are here related, luith the man- 
 ner m ^vhich the different antagonijis behaved to each 
 ether. . ^17 
 
 CHAP. XXUI. 
 ■Jmcng 'ther Things necejfarj to he told, gn>cs an a:{Ount of 
 
 the 
 

<#PG# 9>
CONTENTS. iii 
 
 the fuccefs of a plvt laid by -wr. Chatjrif, for the dif- 
 ctn'cry of mifs Bcifys real inc^nations, ' 1 84. 
 
 C H A P. XXIV. 
 Willfathfy the reader i curioftyin feme pahitSy and incrcafg 
 itviQthers. . 191 
 
 CHAP. XXV. 
 Contaim fomc p^fJ'^gfs, n.i'hich, pirlfapt mdy be looked upon 
 (ts pretty extraordinary, 198 
 
 CHAP. XXVI. 
 Difco-vcrs to mifs Bctfy apiecce of treachery f:e little (tcpeBid 
 to hear of 206 
 
 CHAP. XXVII. 
 ilas 'Very little in it^ bcfides a colledion of Ictteriy fame of 
 nvhicb are much to the purpofey otherj Iff fo, zij 
 
 C H A P. XXVill. 
 Serves as afupplcment to the former. 226 
 
 C H A P, XXIX, 
 Seems to bring things pntts near a conclufott, 233 
 
 CHAP. XXX. 
 Is the better for being /hort. 240 
 
 CHAP. XXXI. 
 
 Contninjfome incidents nvhich ikHI be found equally intcrffling 
 
 and entertaining, or the author is 'very much mifiakcn, 244 
 
 C.H A P. XXXII. 
 
 Is set more interefting than the former, 252 
 
 CHAP. XXXIII. 
 Cannot fail of ex citijig compaffioH in fome reader s^ though it 
 maynwye others to laughter. 260 
 
 C H A P. XXXIV. 
 Sheifs iihnt e^e^s the tranfa^ions, of the preceding night 
 had on the minds of juifs Bctfy and mr. True^v.'orth, 268 
 CHAP.' XXXV. 
 Contaitu feme paffnges, nvhhh, it is probable, iiill afford 
 more pain than pkafure, yet arc i\iy pertinent to the 
 hifory, luid nccejjary to be repeated. 2 "6 
 
 CHAP. XXXM. 
 Js the recital of fome accidents, as little poffthk to he for hen 
 by the reader, as they n,vere by the perfons to nihom they 
 happened, 28"i 
 
 CHAP. 
 

<#PG# 10>
iv CONTENTS. 
 
 CHAP. XXXVII. 
 
 Gi<v€S a full cxplanatto7t of fo7ne paffagcSi "tvhich hitherto 
 
 ha<ve fccTHcd 'very dark and myjierious. 288 
 
 CHAP. XXXVIII. 
 
 Shcnxjs fome part of the confequences, produced by the forgoing 
 
 occurrence. zqi 
 
 C H A P. XXXIX. 
 
 Is a kind of olio, a mixture of jnany things, all of them 
 
 <ve7y much to the purpofe, though lefs entertaining than 
 
 feme others, 304' 
 
 CHAP. XL. 
 
 Contains only fuch things as the reader' might reafonahly ex- 
 
 pe-Sl tg ha<i'e been i? formed of before. 3 1 4 
 
 C HA P. XLI. 
 
 li of n)cry fmall importance, yet contains fuch things as the^ 
 
 > reader may expeci to hear-. 3 2 S"* 
 
 c H A p: XLII. 
 
 Is multum inpar'vo. 333 
 
 C H A P. XLIII. 
 S^heivs mifs Betfy left intirely to her onvn managemmt, and 
 the caife of it, <vjith fo7ne other particulars. 339 
 
 CHAP. XLIV. 
 T^he- autJpor-'is under fome apprehenfons, njcill not he quite 
 pltafing to the hu^wur of every readr. ■ 347 
 
 C H A P. XLV. 
 Gi'-ves an account of a farther, and mere laudable mcfi^ve, 
 to induce ■ mr. Trueivorth to put off his intended journey 
 into the country. " ' 3"5 ^ 
 
 C H A P. XL VI. 
 Riiurn's to mifs Betfys adventures, from ivhich the tivo 
 forme}' ivere biit a digreffion, though a 'very neceffaty one, 
 GS'i^-ill hereafter -appear, 365 
 

<#PG# 11>
( 1 ) 
 
 THE 
 
 HISTO R Y 
 
 O F 
 
 Mifs Betsy Thoughtlfss. 
 
 C FI A p. I. 
 
 Grjfs the reader room to guefs at what is to enfucy 
 iho' ten i'j one hut he finds himfelf decthed. 
 
 IT was always my opinion, that fewer women 
 were undone by love, tlian vanity ; and that 
 thofc miilakes the fex arc fometimcs giiilty of, 
 proceed, for the mofl: part, rather from inad- 
 vertency, than a vicious inclination. The la- 
 dies, however, I am forry to obfervc, are apt to 
 make too little allowances to each oUier on this 
 fcore, and feem better pleafed with an occafion to 
 CMidcnii^, than to cxcufe ; and it is not above one, 
 in a greater Number than I will prefume to men- 
 tion, v/ho, while {^i\z paiTes the fevered cenfure on 
 the condud'of her friend, will be at the trouble of 
 of taking a rctrGfpe<fi: on her own. There are feme 
 who behold, with indignation and contempt, thofc 
 errors in others, which, unhappil .. , they are every 
 i^^Y falling into themfelves ; and as want of a due 
 confideration occafions the gnjjf, fo the want of a 
 due confi'ieration alfo cccafions the fcandal : an! 
 Vol. I. B there 
 

<#PG# 12>
2 "Ihe H I S T O R Y of 
 
 there woLilJ be much Icfs room either for the one 
 or the other, were fonie part of that time, which 
 is WufteJ at the toilet, in confulting what drefs is 
 mort becoming to the face, employed in examining 
 the heart, and what adlons arc mofl becoming of 
 ihc charader, 
 
 Uetf/ 7'houghtlefs was the only daughter of a 
 
 gentleman of good family and fortune in L — c, 
 
 where he confiantly refided, fcarce ever going to 
 London, and contented himfelf with fuch diverfions 
 lis the country affordtd. On the death of liis wife, 
 he Tent this little favourite, then about ten years old, 
 tti a boarding-fchoo], the govcrnefs of which liad 
 the reputation of a woman of great good fenfe, fine 
 "breeding, and every way qualihed for the well form- 
 ing of the minds of thofe young perfons v/ho were 
 cntrufted to her care. 
 
 The old gentleman was (o well plcafed with 
 Jiaving placed his daughter where (he w^as fo likely 
 to improve in all the accomplifhments befitting her 
 fcx, that he never fuffered her to come home, even 
 at: breaking- i!p-timcs, when moft of the ether 
 young ladies did {o ; but as tlie fchool was not above 
 ILven or eight miles from liis feat, he feldom failed 
 calling to fee her once or twice a week. 
 
 Mifi) Betfy, who had a great deal of good-nature, 
 and fomewhat extrcm.ely engaging in her manner 
 cf behaviour, foon gained the afi:'edion not only of 
 the govci nefs, but of all the young ladies ; but as 
 girls, as well as women, have their particular favou- 
 rites, to whom they may conrmunicate their little 
 fecrets, there v/as one, who above all the others 
 was diilinguifhcd by here Mifs Forward, for fo 
 flie was called, was alfo very fond of Mif^Bet/y. 
 T! ii intimacy beginning but in trivial Things, and 
 fuch as fuircd their age, continued as they advanced 
 reirer to maturity. Mifs Forward, however, had 
 two veaf& tiie advantage of her friend, yet did rot • 
 
 ciiiUJn 
 

<#PG# 13>
Af?/} Be Tsv Thoughtless. ^ 
 
 difdain to make her the confidante of a kind of a- 
 morous intrigue (he had entered into with a voung 
 Jad, called Maftcr Sparkifh, the Ton of a neighbour- 
 ing gentleman : he had fallen in Jove with her at 
 church, and had taken all opportunities to convince 
 
 her of his paflion : fhe, proud of being looked 
 
 upon as a woman, encouraged it. — Frequent letters 
 pafled between them ; for (lie never failed to anfwer 
 thofe fhe received from Jiim, both which were 
 fhevvn to Mifs Betfy, and this gave her an earl/ 
 light into the art and myftery of courtfliip, and, 
 confequently, a reliOi for admiratiDn. The youns; 
 lover calling his miftrcfs angel and goddcfs, made 
 her long to be in her teens, that fhe might have 
 the fame fine things faid of her. 
 
 This correfpondence being, by fonre accident, 
 difcovcred, the governefs found it behoved her to 
 keep a ftridl eye upon Mifs Forward ; all t!ie fcr- 
 vants were examined concerning the conveying any 
 letters, either to or from her ; but none of ihcni 
 knew any thing of the matter : it was a fccret to 
 all but Mifs Betfy, who kept it inviolably. It is 
 fit, however, the reader fiiould not remain in ig- 
 norance. 
 
 Mafler Sparkifh had read the flory of Piramug 
 
 and Thifbe ; he told his miflrefs of it, and in 
 
 imitation of thofe lovers of antiquity, fluck his let- 
 ters into a little crevice he found in the garden vvall, 
 whence fhe pulled them out every day, and return- 
 ed her anfvvers by the fame friendly breach, w!;ich 
 he very gallantly told her in one of his epiftles, had 
 been made by the god of love hlmfelf, in order to 
 
 favour his fuit ; Co that all the govcrncfs's cir- 
 
 cumfpe£tion could not hinder this amour from go- 
 ing on without interruption ; and could they have 
 contented themfelves with barely writing to each 
 other, they might, probably, have done fo till iht-y 
 both had been v^'eary j but tho' I will not pretend 
 B 2 to 
 

<#PG# 14>
4 The HISTORY of 
 
 to fay, that cither of them had any thing in their 
 inclinations that was not perfc£lly confiltent witli 
 innocence, yet, it is certain, they both languifhed 
 for a nearer converfation, which the fertile brain of 
 Mils Forward at laft brought about. 
 
 She pretended one Sunday, in the afternoon, to 
 have (o violent a pain in her head, that fhc could 
 n^t go to church : Miis Betfy begged leave to (lay 
 and keep her company, and told the governefs (he 
 would read a fermon, or fome other good book, 
 to her J the good old gentlewoman, little fufpedl- 
 i«g the plot concerted between them, readily con- 
 'fen red. 
 
 No-body being left in the houfe but themfelves, 
 and one maid fcrv/ant, young Sparkifli, who had 
 previous notice at what hour to come, was let in at 
 the garden door, the key being always in it. Mifs 
 Betfy left the lovers in an arbour, and went into 
 the kitchen, telling the maid, fhe,had read Mifs 
 Forward to fleep, and hoped fhe would be better 
 when fhe waktd. She amufed the Vv-ench with one 
 little chat or other, till (lie thought divine fervice 
 was near over, then returned into the garden to give 
 her friends warning it was time tofeparate. 
 
 They had after this many private interviews, 
 thro' the contrivance and allillanceof Mifs Betfy, 
 ■who, quite charmed with being made the confi- 
 dante of a perfon elder than hcrfelf, fet all her wi's 
 to work, to render herfelf worthy of the trufl re- 
 pofed in her, Sonietimes {he made pretences of 
 going to tiie milliner, the mantua maker, or to buy 
 fomething in town, and begged leave, that Mifs 
 Forward Ihould accompany her^ faying, fhe want- 
 ed her choice of what flic was to purchafe. Spar- 
 kifli was always made acquainted when they were 
 to go out, and never failed to give them the meet- 
 
 Mifs 
 

<#PG# 15>
A///} Be TSY Thought LE5S. 5 
 Mifs Forward had a great deal of the coquette 
 in hernaturc :— ^fhe knew how to play at faft-and- 
 loofe with her lover ? and, young as (he was, took a 
 pride in mingling pain with the plcafure (lie bcflow- 
 td.- Mifs Betfy was a witnefs of all the airs the other 
 gave herfelf on this occafion, and the artifices fha 
 made ufe of, in order to fccure the continuance of 
 his addreffes ; fo that thus early initiated into the 
 myllery of courtfliip, it is not to be wondered at, 
 that when "fhe came to the practice, fnc was (o 
 little at a lofs. 
 
 This intcrcourfe, however, laded but a /mall 
 time ; — their meetings v.ere too frequent, and too 
 little circumfpe(5^ion ufed in them, not to be liable 
 to difcovcry. The govcrnefs was informed, that 
 in fpitecf all her care, the yoimg folks had been 
 too cunning for her ; on which (he went to the fa- 
 ther of Sparkifh, acquainted him with what fhe 
 knew of the affuir, and intreatcd he would by his 
 commands on his (on to reh^in all convcrfdti.)n 
 with any of the ladies under her tuition. '1 he o!J 
 gentleman flew into a violent pafTion, at hearii^g 
 
 his fon had already begun to think of love j ho 
 
 called for him, and after having rated his youthful 
 folly in the fevereft manner, charged him to relate 
 the whole truth of what had pafTcd between hiin 
 and the young lady m>entioncd by tlie govcrnefs. 
 'i^he poor lad was terrified beyond mcafjre at his 
 father's anger, and confcfled every particular of his 
 meetings witli Mifs Forward and her companion ; 
 and tlius Mu's Betfy's fhaie of tlic contrivance was 
 brought to light, and drew on her a reprimand c- 
 qualiy fevere with that Mifs Forward had recei\ cd. 
 'i1ie careful govcrnefs would notimirely depend on 
 the afiurances the farther of S'larlifh had civen her, 
 and refolded to iruft neither of the ladies out of h'.r 
 fight, while that young gentleman renjained fo near 
 ihcm, which flie knew would be but a (hort time, 
 B 3 l.e 
 

<#PG# 16>
6 The n IS r OR Y cf 
 
 he having finilhed his fchool learning, and was foon 
 to go to the Univerfity, To prevent, alfo, any 
 future ftratagems being laid between Mifs Betfy 
 and Mifs Forward, flic took care to keep them 
 from ever being alone together, which was a very 
 great mortification to them j but a fudden turn fooii 
 ;»fter happened in the affairs of Mifs Betfy, which 
 put all I have been relating entirely oui of her 
 head. 
 
 CHAP. II. 
 
 Shnvs Mifs Betfy in a new fcene of llfe^ and the 
 frequent opportunities fhe had of putting in prac* 
 iice thofe lejjons fhe was beginning to receive from 
 her young infiru6frefs at the hoar ding- fchooL 
 
 TH O' it is certainly neceflary to inculcate 
 into young girls all imaginable precaution, in 
 regard to their behaviour towards thofe of another 
 fex, yet I know not if it is not an error to dwell 
 too much upon that topic. Mifs Betfy might, pof- 
 fibly, have fooncr forgot the little artifices {!i\^ had 
 feen pra6tifed by Mifs Forward, if her governefs, 
 by too ftrenuoufly endeavouring to convince her 
 how unbecoming they were, had not reminded her 
 of them. Befides, the good old gentlewoman was 
 far flricken in years ; — lime had itt his iron fingers 
 on her cheeks, — had left his cruel marks on every 
 feature of the face, and (he had little remains cf 
 bavins; ever been capable of exciting thofe inclina- 
 tions flic fo much condemned \ — fo that what flic 
 faid fccmed to Mifs Bttfy as fpoke out of envy, or 
 to (hew her authority, rather than the real dictates 
 of truth. 
 
 I have often remarked, that reproofs froin the 
 old and ugly have much lefs ciBcacy than when 
 
 given 
 

<#PG# 17>
il///} Betsy Thoughtless. 7 
 given by perfons lefs advanced in years, and who 
 may be fuppo/ed not altogether paft fenfibility them- 
 felves of the gaieties they advife others to avoid. 
 
 Tho* all the old gentlewoman faid could not 
 perAjade Mifs Betfy there was any harm in Mifs 
 Forward's behaviour towards young Sparkifh, yet 
 fhe had the complaifance to liften to her with all tha 
 attention the other could expe^i:, 01 dcfire from 
 her. 
 
 She was, indeed, as yet too young to confuler of 
 the juftice of the other's reafoning, and her future^ 
 conduct (heweJ, alio, (he was not of a humour to 
 give her felf much pains in examining, or weighing 
 in theballance of judgment, the merit of the argu- 
 ments (he heard urged, whether for or againft any 
 point v./hatfoever. She had a great deal of wir, but 
 was too volatile for rcflccStiop, and as a (liip, with- 
 out fufficient ballaft, is toft about at the ple^ilirc of 
 every wind that blows, fo was ilie hurried thro' the 
 ocean of life, juft as each predominant paiTion di* 
 reeled. 
 
 But I will not anticipate that gratification, which 
 ought to be the reward of a long curioiity. The 
 reader, if he has patience to go thro' the following 
 pages, will fee into the fccret fprings which fct this 
 fair machine in motion, and produced many aclit>ns, 
 which were afcribed, by the ill-jaJging and mali- 
 cious world, to caufcs very difFerent from the real 
 ones. 
 
 Ail this, I fay, will be revealed in time ; but it 
 would be as abfurd in a writer to rulh all at once 
 into the cataftrophe of the adventures he would re- 
 late, as it would be impra6ticable in a traveller to 
 reach the end of a long journey, without fome- 
 
 times flopping at the inns in his way to it. To 
 
 proceed therefore gradually with my hiilory. 
 
 The father of Mifs Betfy was a very worthy, 
 
 honeft, and good natured man, but fomewhat too 
 
 B 4, indolent J 
 

<#PG# 18>
S rhe HISTORY of 
 
 indolent ; and, by depending too much on the 
 fidelity of thofe he entrufted with the^Tianagement 
 ct his affairs, had been fur fevcral years involved in 
 a law fiiit, and, to liis misfortune, the averfion he 
 had to bufinefs rendered him alfo incapable of ex- 
 tricating himfclf from it, and the dccifion was fpun 
 out to a much greater length than it need to have 
 been, could he have been prevailed upon to have 
 attended in perfon the feveral courts of juftice the 
 caufe had been carried thro', by his more induftri- 
 ous advcrfary. 1 he exorbitant bills, hov.'cver, 
 which his lawyers were continually drawiiig upon 
 hirn, joined with the prelTing remonftrances of his 
 friends, at lad roufed him from that inactivity of 
 rhind, which had already cofl him fo dear, and 
 d^terniined him not only to take a journey to Lon- 
 don, but likewife not to return home, 'till he had 
 £ien a final end put to this perplexing affair. 
 
 Be.'ore his departure he weiit to the boarding- 
 fchool, to take his leave of his beloved Betfy, and 
 jcnev/ the charge he had frequently given the go- 
 verncfs concerning her education ; adding, in a 
 i:iournful accent, that it would be a long time be- 
 iore he faw her again. 
 
 ■ Thefe words, as it proved, had fomewhat of 
 prophetic in them. On his arrival in London, he 
 k>und his caufe in fo perplexed and entangled a fi- 
 tuaiion, as gave him liule hopes of ever bringing 
 it to a favourable iffuc. The vexation and fatigue 
 he underwent on this account, joined with the 
 clofcnefsof the town air, which had never agreed 
 with his conflitution, even in his younger years, 
 foon thrcv/ him into that fort of confumption, which 
 goes by the name of a galloping one, and they fay, 
 k the mod difficult of any to be removed. He died 
 in about three months, without being able to do 
 •*\\y great matters concerning the affair, which had 
 diavvn him from his peaceful home, aid according 
 
 to 
 

<#PG# 19>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 9 
 
 to all probability haft^ed his fate. Being per- 
 U6k\y fenfible, and convinced of his approaching 
 diflblution, he made his will, bequcatliirg the bulk 
 of his eflate to him whofe right it v/as, his eldcll 
 fon, then upon his travels thro' the gicatcft part 
 of Europe J all hisperfonals, which wcie very con- 
 fiderable in the bank, and other public funds, he 
 ordered fliould be equally divided between Francis 
 hisfccond fon, at that timea ftudcnt at Oxford, and 
 Mils Bctly ; conftituting, at the finu time, ai 
 Iruftees to the faid te'hment, S\f Ralph Trufty, 
 his near neighbour in the country, and Mr. (jood- 
 man, a wealthy merchant in the city of London \ 
 both of them gentlemen of unqueftionabic integrity, 
 a!)d with whom he had preferved a long and unin- 
 terrupted friendfhip. 
 
 On the arrival of this melancholy news, Mi/*s 
 Bctfy felt as much grief as it w.;s poiFiblc tor a heart 
 io young and gay as hers to be capable of ; but a 
 little time, for the mofl part, fcrves to obliterate 
 the memory of misfortunes of this nature, even in 
 perfbns of a riper age ; and had Mils Betfy been 
 more afflidied than (he was, fomething happened 
 foon after, which would have very much contii- 
 buted to her confulation. 
 
 Mr. Goodman having lived without marrying tifl 
 he had reached an age, v:hich one fhould have ima- 
 gined would have prevented him from thinking of 
 it at all, at laft took it into hio head to become a huf- 
 band. The perfon he made choice of was called 
 Lady Mellafmj reli6l of a baronet, who having 
 little or no eftate, had accepted of a fmall employ- 
 ment about the court, inv/hich poft he died, leav- 
 ing her la.lyfhip one daughter, named Flora, in a 
 very deftitute condition. Goodman, however, had 
 wealth enough for both, and confuited no other in- 
 tereft than that of his heart. 
 
 B 5 A5 
 

<#PG# 20>
JO 5-/;^ H I S T O R Y of 
 
 As for the lady, the motive on which fbc had con- 
 fented to be his wife may eafily be guefled ; and 
 ■when once made fo, gained fuch an abfolutc afcen- 
 dancyover him, that whatever {he declared as her 
 will, with him had the force of a law. She had 
 
 an avcrfion to the city ; he immediately took 
 
 a houfe of her choofnigat St. James's, inconvenient 
 as it w£S for his bufinefs. Whatever fervants (he 
 difapprovcd, tho' of never fo long landing, and of 
 the mod approved fidelity, were difcharged, and 
 others, more agreeable to her, put in their places. 
 
 In fine, nothing (lie dcfired was denied j he 
 
 confidered her as an oracle of wit and wifdom, and 
 thought it would be an unpardonable arrogance to 
 atrem.pt to fct his reafon againft hers. 
 
 This lady was no focner informed of the truft 
 repofed in him, than flie told him, flie thought it 
 would be highly proper for Mifs Betfy to be fent 
 for from the fchool, and boarded with them, not 
 only as her daughter would be a fine companion for 
 that young orphan, they being much of the fame 
 age, and (lie herfelf was more capable of improving 
 lier mind, than any govcrnefs of a fchool could be 
 fuppcfcd to be; but that alfo having l-.er under his 
 •own eye, he would be more'able to difchargc his 
 ^uty towwirds her as a guardian, than if Ilie were at 
 the dlRance of near an h.undred miles. 
 
 There was fomething in this propofal which had 
 indeed the face of a great deal of good-nature and 
 confiucration for Mifs Bctfy, at leaft it feemed high- 
 ly fo to Mr. Goodman ; but as Sir Ralph Trudy 
 was joined with him in the guardianfliip of that 
 young beauty, and was at that time in London, he 
 thought it proper to confult him en the occafion \ 
 vvhich heaving done, and finding no objcc'Hon on thq 
 part of the other, lady Mellafin, ta (ikew her great 
 complaifance to the daughter of h^r hufband's de- 
 fOLafcd fjriend, fent her gwn woman to bring her 
 

<#PG# 21>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. ii 
 
 frpm' the boarding-fchool, anJ attend her up to 
 London. 
 
 Mifs Betfy had never feen this great metropolis ; 
 but had heard fo much of the gay manner in which 
 the genteel part of the world paflvd their time in it, 
 that (he was quite tranfported r.t being told flie was 
 to be removed thither. Mrs. Prinks (for fo lady 
 JMellafm's woman was called) did not fail to heigh- 
 ten her ideas of the pleafures of the place to which 
 fhe was going, nor to magnify the goodncfsof her 
 lady, in taking her under her care, with the mc(l 
 extravagant encomiums : it is not, therefore, to be 
 won^lered at, that neither the tears of tie good go- 
 ycrncfs, who truly loved her, nor thofe of her dear 
 Mifs Forward, nor any of thofc (lie left behind, 
 Could give any more than a mimcntary regret to a 
 heart fo pofll-d with the exptclations of going to 
 receive every thing with which youth is liable to 
 be enchanted. She promiftd, howcvtr, to keep 
 up a corrcfpondence by letters, which fhc did, 'till 
 things, that feemed to her of much more impor- 
 tance, put her L e acquaintance entirely out 
 
 of her head. 
 
 . She was met at the inn, where the (lage put up, 
 by Mr. Goodman in his own coach, accompanied 
 by Mifs Flora : Th« good old gentleman embraced 
 her with the utmoft tendernefs, and afiured her that 
 nothing in his power, or in that of his family, 
 would be wanting to compenfate as much as po>fii- 
 bJe the lofs file had fullained by the death of her 
 parents. The young lady alfo fetid many obliging 
 things to her, and they feemed highly taken witii 
 each other at this hrft interview, which gave the 
 honeft heart of Goodman an infinite fatisfaction. 
 
 The reception <i;iven her by lady Mellafui when 
 .brought home, and prefented to her by her hufDand, 
 was conformable to what Mrs. Prinks, had made her 
 expedj— that lady omitting notliinjr to make her 
 
 certain 
 

<#PG# 22>
12 7i^ H I S T O R Y of 
 
 certain of being always treated by her with the fame 
 affe6ilon as her own daughter. 
 
 Sir Ralph Trufty, on being Informed his young 
 charge was come to town, came the next day to 
 Mr. Goodman's to vifit her.' His lady accom- 
 panied him. There had been a great intimacy and 
 friendfhip between her, and the mother of Mifs 
 Beify, and fhe could not hold in her arms the chil^ 
 of a perfon fo dear to her, without letting fall fome 
 tears, which were looked upon, by the company, 
 as the tribute due to the memory of the dead. The 
 conje6lure, in part, might be true, but the flow 
 proceeded from the mixture of another motive, not 
 furpe(5^ed : — that of compaffion for the living. This 
 lady was a woman of great prudence, piety, and 
 
 virtue J fhe had heard many things relating to 
 
 the condu(5l of lady Mellafin, which made her thrnk 
 her a very unfit perfon to have the care of youth, 
 efpecially thofe of her own fex. She had been 
 extremely troubled when Sir Ralph told her, that 
 Mifs Betfy was fent for from the country, to live 
 uPidcr fuch tuition, aixl would fain have oppofed 
 it, could fhe have done fo without danger of creat- 
 ing a mifunderftanding between him and Mr. Good- 
 man, well knowing the bigotted refped^ the latter 
 had for bis wife, and how unv/iiling he would be to 
 do any thing, that had the leaft tendency to thwart 
 her inclinations. She communicated her fentiments, 
 however, on this occafion, to no perfon in the world, 
 not even to her own hufband ; but refolved, within 
 herfelf, to take all the opportunities that fell in her 
 way, of giving Mifs Betfy fuch lnftru(5tions as fhe 
 thought neceflary for her behaviour in general, and 
 cfpecially towards the family in which it was her lot 
 to be placed. - * 
 
 Mifs Betfy was now juft entering into her four- 
 teenth year, — a nice and delicate time, in perfons 
 •f her fex j fince jt is theii they are moft apt to 
 
 take 
 

<#PG# 23>
Af//} Betsy Thoughtless. 13 
 
 take the bent of impreffion, which, according as 
 it is well or ill diredted, makes, or marrs, the fu- 
 ture profpedt of, their lives. She was tall, well 
 fhaped, and perfedly amiable, without being what 
 is called a compleat beauty, and as fhe wanted no- 
 thing to render her liable to the greateft tempta- 
 tions, fo (he ftood in need of the iurelt arms for 
 her defence againft them. 
 
 But while this worthy lady was full of cares, for 
 the well doing of a young creature, who appeared 
 fo deferving of regard, Mifs Betfy thought (he had 
 the higheft reafon to be faiisfied with her fituation, 
 and how, indeed, could it be othcrwife ? — lady 
 
 Mellafin kept a great deal of company ; (he 
 
 received vlfits every morning from ten to one o'clock, 
 from the moft gay and polite of both fexes ? — all 
 the news of the town was talked on at her levee, 
 and it feldom happened that fome party of pleafure 
 was not formed for the enfuing evening, in all which 
 Mifs Bctfy and Mifs Flora had their (hare. 
 
 Never did themiilrefs of a private family indulge 
 herfelF, and thofe about her, witii fuch a continual 
 round of p jblick diverfions. The court, the play, 
 the ball, an 1 opera, with giving and receiving vifitt', 
 engrofl'ed all the time could be fpared from the toi- 
 let. It cannot, therefore, feem (Irange, that Mifs 
 Betfy, to whom all thefe things were entirely new, 
 {hould have her head turned with the promifcuous 
 enjoyment, and the very power of refinfiicn loft 
 amidft the giddy whirl, nor that it (hould he fo 
 long before die could recover it enough, to fee the 
 little true felicity of fuch a courfeof life. 
 
 Amon.^ the many topics, with which this bril- 
 liant fociety entertained each other, it may l;e ea- 
 fily fuppofed, that love and gallantry were not ex- 
 cluded. Lady Mellafin, tho' turned of forty, had 
 her fine things faid to her ; but both heavtn and 
 earth were ranfack'd for comparifons in favour of 
 
 th« 
 

<#PG# 24>
14 The HISTORY of ' 
 
 the beauty of Mils Flora and Mifs Betfy J but a? 
 there was nothing particular in thcfc kind of ad- 
 drefles, and intended only to fhew the wit of tiiofe that 
 made them, thefc young ladies anfwcrcd them only 
 with raillery, in which art Mifs Bctfy foon learned 
 
 to excel. She had the glory, however, of being 
 
 the firit who excited a real paflion in the heart of 
 any of thole who viiited lady Mellafm ; tho' being 
 accuftomed to hear declarations, which had the 
 appearance of love, yet were really no more than 
 words of courfe, and made indifcriminately to every 
 ^nQ woman, fhe would not prefcntly perfuade her- 
 felf, that this was more ferious. 
 
 This firil vi£lim of her charms, was the only fon 
 of a very rich alderman, and having a fortune left 
 him by a relation, inde; endant of his father, Vv'ho 
 was the greateft mifer in the world, was furnifhcd 
 with the means of mingling with the beau monde, 
 and of making one at every diverfion that v/as pro- 
 pofed. 
 
 He had fancied Mifs Flora a mighty fine creature, 
 before hcfavv Mifs Betfy j but the imaginary flame 
 he had for her was foon converted into a fincere one 
 for the other. He truly loved her, and was almofl 
 diftra6ted at the little credit fhe gave to his profefii- 
 
 ons. His perfeverance, -his tremblings, whenever 
 
 he approached her, — his tranfports on feeing her, — 
 his anxieties at taking leave, lb different from what 
 {lie hadobfcrved in any other of thofe who had pre- 
 tended to lift thcmfelvcs under the banner of her 
 charmSj at length convincing her of the conqueft 
 fhe had made, av^akened in her bread that vanity 
 fo natural to a youthful mind. She exulted,— 
 
 file plumed herfclf, flie ufed him ill and well by 
 
 turns, taking an equal pleafure in raifing, or de- 
 prefiing, his hopes, and, in fpite of her good na- 
 ture, felt no fatisfadiion fuperior to that of the con- 
 fcioufiiefs of a power of giving pain to the man who 
 
 loveil 
 

<#PG# 25>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 1-5 
 
 loved her; but' with how great a mortification 
 
 this {hort-liv'd triumph was fucceeded, the reader 
 ihall prefently be made fenfible. 
 
 CHAP. III. 
 
 Jeffords matter of condolance^ or railery^ according 
 to the humour the reader happens to be in for ei' 
 iher. 
 
 WE often fee, that the lefs encouragement is 
 given to the lover's fuit, with the more 
 warmth and eagernefs he prcfecutes it j and many 
 people are apt to afcribe this hopelcfs perfeverance 
 to an odd perverfcnefs in the very nature of love -, 
 but, for my part, I rather take it to proceed from 
 an ambition of furmounting d'iEculties : it is not, 
 however, my province to enter into any difcuHi- 
 on of fo nice a point ; Ideal only in mat- 
 ters of fa(5t, and {hall not meddle with defini- 
 tion. 
 
 It was not, till after Mifs Bcify had reafon to 
 believe (he had engaged the he.^rt of her lover too 
 far for him to recall it, that (he began to take a 
 pride in tormenting him. While (lie looked on 
 his addrefles as of a piece with thofe who calle«l 
 themfelves her admirers, (he had treated him in 
 that mianner which flie thought would moft con- 
 duce to make him really fo : but no fooncr did flic 
 perceive, by the tokens before- mentioned, and many 
 others, that his pailion v/as of the mod: ferious 
 nature, than fhe behaved to him in a fafliion quits 
 the reverfe, efpecially before company : for as {he 
 had not the lead afFe£lion, or even a liking towards 
 him, his fubmifiive deportment under the moil 
 cold, fometimes contemptuous carriage, could af- 
 ford her no other fatii>fadlion, than, as {he fanci- 
 
 - edi 
 

<#PG# 26>
i6 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 cd, it fhewed the power of her beauty, and piqued 
 thofe ladies of her acquaintance, who could not 
 boaft of fuch an implicit refignation, and patient 
 fuffering from their lovers ; in particular Mifs Flora, 
 who (he could not forbear imagining looked very 
 grave on the occafion. What foundation there 
 was for a conje6lure of this nature was, neverthe- 
 lefs, undifcoverable, 'till a long time after. 
 
 As this courtfhip was no fecret to any of the fa- 
 mily, Mr. Goodman thought himfelf obliged, both 
 as the guardian of Mifs Betfy, and the friend of 
 alderman Saving, (for fo the father of this young 
 cnamorato was called) to enquire upon what foot- 
 ing it flood. He thought, that if the old man 
 knew and approved of his fon's inclinations, he 
 would have mentioned the affair to him, as they 
 frequently faw each other, and it feemed to him, 
 neither for the intereft, nor reputation of his fair 
 charge, to receive the clandeftine addrefies of any 
 man whatfoever. She had a handfome fortune of 
 her own, and he thought that, and her perfonal ac- 
 complifliments, fufficient to entitle her to as good 
 a match as Mr. Saving ; but then he knew the for- 
 did nature of the alderman, and that all the merits 
 of Mifsi Betfy would add nothing in the balance, 
 if her money was fouwl too light to poize againft 
 the fums his {o\\ would be poffeffed of. This be- 
 ing the cafe, he doubted not but that he was kept 
 in ignorance of the young man's intentions, and 
 fearing the matter might be carried too far, refolved 
 either to put a ftop to it at once, or permit it to 
 go on, on fuch terms as fhould free him from alt 
 cenfure from the one or the other party. 
 
 On talking ferioufly to the lover, he foon found 
 the fuggeftions he had entertained had not deceiv- 
 ed him. Young Saving frankly confefTed, that his 
 father had other views for him ; but added, that 
 if he could prevail on the young lady to marry him, 
 
 he 
 

<#PG# 27>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 17 
 
 he did not defpair but that when the thing wa4 
 once done, and paft recall, the alderman would, hy 
 degrees, receives them into favour. " Ycu know, 
 " ^ir," laid he, *' that he has no child but me,, 
 nor any kindred for whom he has the Icaft re- 
 gard, and it cannot be fuppofed he would ut- 
 terly difcard me for following my inclinations in 
 this point, efpccially as they are in favour of 
 ** the moil amiable and deferving of her fex." 
 He faid much more on this hicad, but it had na 
 
 weight wiUi the merchant : he anfwered, that 
 
 if the alderman was of his way of tliinking, all the 
 flattering hopes his paflion fuggefled to him, on 
 that fcorc, might be realized ; but that, according 
 to the difpofition he knew him to be of, he fav^r 
 but little room to think he would forgive a flep of 
 
 this kind : *' Tlierefore," coninucd he, *' I 
 
 *' cannot allow tiiis love afta^r to be profccuted 
 *' any farther, and muft defire you will dcfiit vi- 
 *' fitting at my houfe, 'till you have cither cciv- 
 '^ cjuercd this inclination, or Mifs Betfy is other- 
 " wifcdifpofed of." 
 
 This was a cruel fentence for the truly rifFc«Sli- 
 onate Saving ; but he found it in vain to follicit a 
 repeal of it, and all he cou'd ob.'ain from him, 
 was a promife to fay nothing of what had pafied to 
 the alderman. 
 
 ^4r. Goodman would have thought he had but 
 half complcattd his duty, had he negleviled to found 
 the inclinations of Mifs Bctfy on this account, and, 
 in order to come more eafily at the truth, he be- 
 gan v/ith talking to her, \v\ a manner which might 
 make her look on him rather as a favourer of Mr. 
 Saving's pretenfions than the contrary', and wrs ex- 
 treamly glad to find, by her replies, how indiffer- 
 ent .that young lover was to her. He tlicn acquaint- 
 -ed her with the refolution he had taken, and the 
 difcourfe he had jufl had with him : and, to keep 
 
 her 
 

<#PG# 28>
i8 ne HISTORY cf 
 
 her from ever after encouraging thcaddrcfles of any 
 man, without being authorifed by the confent of 
 friends on both fides, reprefented, in the moft pa- 
 thetic terms he was able, the danger to which a 
 private correfpondence renders a young woman lia- 
 ble. She fecmcd convinced of the truth of what 
 he faid, and promifed to follow, in the ftrideft 
 manner, his advice. 
 
 Whether (lie thought herfelf, in reality, fo much 
 obliged to the condu6b of her guardian in this, I 
 will not take upon me to fay ; for tho' (lie was 
 not charmed with the perfon of Mr. Saving, it is 
 certain (he took an infinite pleafure in the affidui- 
 ties of his paflion : it is therefore highly probable, 
 that fhe might imagine he meddled in this affair 
 more than he had any occafion to have done. She 
 had, however, but little time for reflexion on her 
 guardian's behaviour, an accident happening, which 
 fliewed her own to her in a light very different froiij 
 what (he had ever feen it. 
 
 Lady Mellafm had a ball at her houfe : — there 
 was a great deal of company, among whom was a 
 gentleman, named Gayland : He was a man of 
 
 family, had a large eftatc, fung, danced, fpoke 
 
 French, and dreffed well ; frequent fucceffes a- 
 
 mong the women had rendered him extremely vain, 
 and as he had too great an admiration for his own 
 perfon to be poffclieJ of any great fhare of it for 
 that of any other, he enjoyed the pleafures of love, 
 without beinp: fcnfible of the pains. This darling 
 of the fair it v/as, that Mifs Betfy picked out, to 
 treat with the moft peculiar marks of efteem, when- 
 ever fhe had a mind to give umbrage to poor Sa- 
 ving : muci] had that faithful lover fuffercd on the 
 account of this fop ; but the fair infliclor of his 
 orments was punifhed for her infenfibility and in- 
 gratitude, by a way her inexperience of the world, 
 
 and 
 

<#PG# 29>
JV/Z^^Betsy Thoughtles?; 19 
 
 and the temper of mankind in general, had made 
 her far from apprehending. 
 
 While the company were employed, fome in 
 dancing, and others in particular converfations, the 
 beau found an opportunity to flip into Mifs Betfy's 
 hand a iittle billet, faying to her, at the fame time, 
 *' You have got my heart, and this little bit of 
 *' paper will convey to you the fentlments it is in- 
 •' fpired with .in your favour." She imagining it 
 was either a fonnet, or epiftle, in praife of her 
 beauty, received it with a fmile, and put it into 
 her pocket. After every body had taken leave, and 
 fhe was retired to her chamber, (he examined it, 
 and found to her great aftonilhment the contents as 
 follow : 
 
 *' D^ar Mifs, 
 *' T MUST certainly be either the mod ungratc- 
 *' X ful, or mod confumedly dull fellow upon 
 *' earth, not to have returned the advances you 
 *' have been fo kind to make me, had the leaft op- 
 •' portunity offered for my doing fo ; but lady 
 *« Mellafm, her daughter, the fool having, or fome 
 *' impertinent creature or other, has always been 
 " in the way, fo that there was not a polfibility 
 *' of giving you even the leuil earned of love -, but, 
 *' my dear, I have found out a way to pay you 
 
 *' the whole fum with interefl ; which is this : 
 
 *.' You muft invent feme excufe for going 
 
 '' out alone, and let me know by a billet diredieJ 
 *' for me at White's, the cxa(ft hour, and I will 
 ** wait for you at the corner of the ftreet in a 
 " hackney coach,' the window drawn up, and 
 " whirl you to a pretty fnug place I know of, 
 " where we may pafs a delicious hour or two, 
 *' without a foul to interrupt our pleafures. Let 
 *' me find a line from vou to-morrow, if you can 
 
 " any 
 

<#PG# 30>
2© The HISTORY of 
 
 ** any way contrive it, being impatient to convince 
 " you how much I am, 
 
 " My dear creature, 
 
 " Yours, he. kc, 
 
 *' J. Gayland." 
 
 ImpoiTible is it to cxprefs the mingled emotions 
 of fnamc, fiirprize, and indignation, which filled 
 the breail of Mifs Betfy, on reading this bold in- 
 vitation : file threw the letter on the ground, 
 
 fhe (lamped upon it, flie fpurned it, and v/ould 
 have treated the author in the fame manner, had 
 he been prefent ; but the firft tranfport of fo juil 
 a refcntment being over, a confcioufnefs of having, 
 by a too free behaviour tov/ards him, emboldened 
 him to take this liberty, involved her in the utmoft 
 confufion, and fae v^-as little lefs enraged with her- 
 fclf, than file had reafon to be with him. She 
 could have tore out her very eyes, for having af- 
 fected to look kindly on a wretch, who durft pre- 
 fume fo far on her fuppofed affecSiion, and tho* flie 
 fpared thofe pretty twincklers that violence, flic 
 ha!f drowned their luftre in a deluge of tears. Ne- 
 ver v/as a night pafled in more cruel anxieties 
 than what fhe fudained, both from the afFront (he 
 had received, and rcfl?:ction, that it was chiefly 
 the folly of her own conducf, which had brought 
 it on her ; and what greatly added to her vexation, 
 was the uncertainty how it would befl: become her 
 to a6f, on an occafion which appeared fo extraor- 
 dinary to her. She had no friend whom fhe thought 
 it proper to confult ; ^flic was afhamed to re- 
 late the (lory to any of the difcrect and ferious pact 
 
 of her acquaintance ; fire feared their reproofs 
 
 for having counterfeited a tendernefs for a man, 
 which fhe was now fenfible fhe ought, if it had 
 been real, rather to have concealed with the utmoft 
 
 care, both from him, and all the v/orld : -and as 
 
 for 
 

<#PG# 31>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 21 
 
 for lady Mellafin and Mifs Flora, though their 
 condu6t infpired her not with any manner of awe, 
 yet (he thought flie faw fomething in thofe hidics, 
 which did not promife much fmcerity, and fhewed 
 as if they woulil rather turn her complaints into ri- 
 dicule, than afford her that cordial and friendly ad- 
 vice flie flood in need of. 
 
 Thefe were the reafons v;hich determined her 
 to keep the whole thing a fecret from every one. 
 At firft file was tempted to write to Gayland, and 
 tcflify her difdain of his prefumption, in terms 
 which fhould convince him how grof^iy his vanity 
 had impofcd upon him ; but fhc afterwards confi- 
 dercd, that a letter from her was doing him too 
 much honour, and, though never fo reproachful, 
 might draw another from him, either to excufe 
 and beg pardon for the temerity of the former, or 
 pofTibly to aftront her a fecord time, by defending 
 it, and repeating his requefl. SliC dtfpifcd and hst- 
 cd him too much to engage in a correfpcndence 
 with him of any kind, and therefore refolved, as 
 it was certainly mofl prudent, not to let him have 
 any thing under her hand, but, when next (he 
 faw him, to fhew her refcntment by fuch ways as 
 occafion fhould permit. 
 
 He came not to Air. Goodman's, however, for 
 three days, pofTibly waiting that time for a letter 
 from Alifs Betfy ; but on tiie fourth he appeared *t 
 lady Mcllafrn's tea-table. There were, befides the 
 family, feveral others prefent, fo that he had not 
 an opportunity of fpccking in private to Mifs 
 Bet fy ; but the looks fhe -gave h-m, fo difTcrcnt 
 from all he had ever feen her allume towards him, 
 might have fhewn any man, not blinded wi'h his 
 vanity, how much (he was offended ; but he ima- 
 gining her ill-hum.our proceeded only from the 
 . w^int of means to fend to him, came again the next 
 day, and happening to find her alone in the par- 
 lour, 
 

<#PG# 32>
22 The HISTORY of 
 
 Jour, ** What, my dear," fald he, taking her in 
 a free manner by the hand, " have you been (o 
 " clofely watched by your guardian and guardia- 
 " ncfles here, that no kind moment offered for 
 *' you to anfwer the devoirs of your humble fer- 
 ** vant?** '* The fureft guardians of my fame 
 *^ and peace,'* replied fhe, fnatching her hand a- 
 way, *' is the little fhare of underftanding I am 
 *' miftrefs of, which, I hope, will always be fuf* 
 *' ficient to defend my honour in more danger- 
 *' ous attacks, than the rude impertinencics of an 
 *' idle coxcomb." 
 
 Thefe v/ords, and the air with which they were 
 fpoke, one would think, (hould have ftruck with 
 confufion tlie perfon to whom they were dire(S^ed ; 
 but Gayland v/as not fo eafily put out of counte- 
 nance, and looking her full in the face, *' Ah, 
 
 «« Child !" cried he, " fure you are not in your 
 
 *' right fenfes to-day : — ^—underftanding, im- 
 
 ** pertinencies, — ^— idle coxcomb, very pleafant 
 
 " i'faith ! but upon my foul, if you think thtfe airs 
 " become you, you are the moft miftaken woman 
 *' in the world." *' It may be fo," cried jQie, 
 ready to hvv'A with inward fpite at his infolencc, 
 '' but I fho.-ld be yet more miftaken, if I were 
 *' capable of tiiinking a wretch, like you, worthy 
 " of any thing but contempt." With thefe words 
 fhe flung out of the room, and he purfued her with 
 a horfe-iaugh, till fhe was out of hearing, and 
 then went into the dining-room, where he found 
 lady Mellailn, and feveral who had come to viftt 
 her. 
 
 Mifs Betfy, who had gone directly to her own 
 chamber, fent to excufe coming down to tea, pre- 
 tending a violent hesd-ach ; nor would be prevail- 
 ed upon to join the company, 'till fhe heard Gay- 
 land had taken his leave, which he did much fooner 
 
 than 
 

<#PG# 33>
J\///i Betsy Thoughtless. 2^ 
 
 than ufual, being probably a good deal difconccrted 
 at the Ihock his vanity had received. 
 
 CHAP. IV. 
 
 Verefjes the old proverb^ that one affliSlion treads 
 upon the heels of another, 
 
 AS Mifs Betfy was prevented from difcovering 
 to any one, the impudent attempt Gayland 
 had made on her virtue, by thefliame of having em- 
 boldened him to it, by too unreferved a behaviour, 
 fo alfo the fhamc cf the dlfappointment, and rebuff 
 he had received from her, kept him from faying 
 any thing of what had pailcd between them ; and 
 this rcfolution, on botli fides, rendered it very dif- 
 ficult for either of them to carry to the other, To 
 as not to give feme fufpicion. Betfy could not al- 
 ways avoid feeing him, when he ci:me to h6y Mel- 
 lafm's, for he would not all at once dcfift his vifit, 
 for two reafons : firft, becaufc it might give ccca- 
 fion for an enquiry into the caufe ; ard fecordly, 
 becaufc Mifs Betfy would plume hcrfclf on the oc- 
 cafion, as having, by her fcorn, triumphed over 
 his audacity, and drove him from the field of bat- 
 tle. He therefore refolved to continue his vifits for 
 fomc time, and to pique her, as lie imagined, di- 
 r-e£ied all the fine things his common place- book 
 was well flored with, to Mifs Flora, leaving tlie 
 other wholly ncgle(5^c:d. 
 
 But here he was little Icfs deceived, than he had 
 been before in the fentinients of that young lady : 
 the hatred his late behaviour had given her, and the 
 utter dctellation it had excited in her toward-: him, 
 had, for a time, extinguiflicd that vanity, fo almoft 
 infeparai/ic from youth, efpecially when accompa- 
 nied with beauty j and fhc rather rejoiced, than the 
 
 contrary, 
 

<#PG# 34>
24 1'he HISTORY of 
 
 contrary, to fee him afFe6l to be fo much taken up 
 with Mifs Flora, that he could fcarce fay the leali 
 complairant thing to her, as it freed her from the 
 necellity of returning it, in fome meafure. Her 
 good fenfe had now fcope to operate ; — (he faw, 
 as rn a mirror, her own late follies in thofe of Miis 
 Flora, who fwcllcd with all the pride of flattered 
 vanity, on this new imaginary conqueft over the 
 heart of, the accomplifhed Gay land, as he v/as ge- 
 nerally efteemed, and perceived the errors of fuch a 
 way of thinking and a(^ing, in fo clear a light, as 
 had it continued, would, doubtlefs, have fpared her 
 thofe anxieties her relapfe from it afterwards occa- 
 iioned. 
 
 In thefe ferious refleilions let us leave her, for 
 a time, to fee in what fituatisn Mr. Saving v/as, 
 after being denied accefs to his milirefs. As it was 
 impoflible for a heart to be more truly fincere and 
 afte(51ionate, he was far from being able to make 
 any effoits for the banifhing Mifs Betfy's image 
 thence: on the contrary, he thought of nothing 
 but how to continue a correfpondtnce with her, 
 and endeavour, by all the means in his power, to 
 engage her to a private interview. As his flame was 
 pure and refpe6i:ful, he vvas (ovtiQ days debating withirt 
 hinifclfhow to proceed, fo as not to let her think 
 he had defifled from his pretenficns, or to continue 
 them in a manner at which flie fliould not be of* 
 fended. Love, when real, fc'do.ii fails of infp'r*- 
 ino; 'the breafl: that harbours it with an equal fhare 
 of timidity :-The trembled whenever he thought of 
 folliciting a meeting, yet, without it, how could 
 he hope to retain any place in her memory, much 
 lefs make any progrcfs in gaining her atRdiion ! at 
 Ien2;th, however, he aflum.ed courage enough to 
 write to her, and, by a bribe to one of the fer- 
 vants, got his letter delivered to her, fearirg -if he 
 fcnt it by the poft, or any public way to the houfei 
 

<#PG# 35>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 25 
 It v/oiild be Intercepted, by the caution he found 
 Mr. Goodman had refolved to obferve in this point. 
 Mifs Betfy, knowing his hand by the rupeifcrip- 
 tion, was a Jittle furprized, as, perhaps, having ne- 
 ver thought of him Hncc they parted, but opened 
 it without the leaft emotion, cither of pain or plea- 
 fure: — fhe knew him too well to be under any ap- 
 prehenfions of being treated by him as flic had been 
 by Gayland, and was too little fenfible of his me- 
 rits to feel the Icaft impatience for examining the 
 dictates of his affection; yet, indifferent as flic was, 
 fne could not forbear being touched on reading 
 thefe lines: 
 
 '* Moji adored of your fex^ 
 " T DOUBT not but you are acquainted witfi 
 " JL Mr. Goodman's behaviour to mej but oh ! 
 " I fear, you are too infeafible of the agonies, in 
 " which my foul labours, through his cruel cau- 
 " tion-f-^— Dreadful is the lufs of fight, yet what 
 
 " is fight to me, when it prefents not you !- • 
 
 ^' Though I faw you regardicfs of my ardent paf- 
 " fion, yet ftill 1 iaw you, and wliile I did (o^ 
 
 " could not be wholly wretched. What ha\e 
 
 " I not indurcd fince deprived of that only joy, 
 
 *' for which I wifli to live 1-^ Had it not been 
 
 " improper for me to have been fecn near Mr. 
 *' Goodman's houfe, after having been forbad en- 
 *' trance to if, I fliould have dwelt for ever in 
 " your flreet, in hope of fwmetimcs getting a 
 ** glimpfe of you from one or other of the win- 
 *' dows; this I thought would be taken notice of, 
 
 " and might offend you : But darknefs freed 
 
 " me from thefe apprehenfions, and gave me the 
 *' confolation of breathing in the fame air v.'ith you. 
 " — r~Soon as I. thought alt watchful eyes were 
 " -clofcd, I flew to the place, which, where ever 
 '* my body is, contains my heart and all its facul- 
 
 VoL I. C <* tics. 
 

<#PG# 36>
26 Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 ** ties. I pleafcd m} felf with looking on the roof 
 " that covers you, and invoked every ftar to pre- 
 *' fent me to you in your fleep, in a form more 
 *' agreeable than I canjiope I ever appeared in to 
 " your waking fancy. Thus have 1 pafTed each 
 ** night, and when the morning dawned, unwill- 
 " ingly retired to take that reft, which nature more 
 " efpecially demands, when heavy melancholy op- 
 '* prefTes the heart. I flept, — but how ? — diftra(5i- 
 *' ing images fwam in my tormented brain, and 
 " waked me with horrors inconceivable. Equally 
 ** loft to bufmefs, as to all focial commerce, I fly 
 •' mankind, and like fome difcontented ghoft feek 
 " out the moft felirary walks, and loncl\^ ftiades, 
 *' to pour forth my complaints. O mifs Bctfy ! I 
 *' cannot live, if longer denied the fight of you ! 
 *' — In pity to my fufferings, permit me yet once 
 " more to fpeak to you, even tho' it be to take a 
 " laft farewell. I have made a little kind of inte- 
 " reft with the woman at the habit-fhop, in Co- 
 *' vent-garden, where I know you fometimes go : 
 '' — I dread to intreat you would call there to- 
 *' morrow, yet if you are fo divinely good, be 
 *' afTured I fhall entertain no prefuming hopes oa 
 *' the condefcenfion you (hall be pleafed to make 
 " me ; but acknowledge it as the meer effed of 
 *' that compaiTion, which is inherent to a generous 
 *' mind. Alas ! I muft be much more worthy 
 '' than I can yet pretend to be, before I dare flat- 
 " ter my felf with owing any thing to a more foft 
 *' emotion, than thofe I have mentioned. Accufe 
 *' me not, therefore, of too much boldnefs in this 
 " petition, but grant to my defpair what you 
 •' would deny to the love of 
 
 " Your moft faithful, 
 
 *' And everlafting Have, 
 
 " H. Saving. 
 
 " P. S. 
 

<#PG# 37>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 27 
 
 ** P. S. The favour of one line to let me know 
 ** whether I may expert the bleffing I implore, 
 *' will add to the bounty of it. The fame hand 
 *' that brings you this, will alfo deliver your 
 *' commands to yours as above," 
 
 Mifs Betfy read this letter feveral times, and the 
 oftner fhe did (o^ the more (he faw into the foul 
 of him that fent it. How wide the difference be- 
 tween this, and that fhe had received from Gay- 
 Jand ! 'Tis true, they both defired a meeting, eacii 
 made the fame requeft, but the manner in which 
 the former was afkcd, and tiie end propofed by the 
 grant of it, fiie eafily perceived were as diftant as 
 heaven and hell. She called to mind the great re- 
 rpedt he had always treated her with ; — (he was 
 convinced both of his honour and fincerity, and 
 (bought fomething was due from her on that ac- 
 count. In fine, after deliberating wifhin herfcif, 
 (he refolved to grant his requcff, and accordingly 
 wrote to him in thefe terms ; 
 
 " Sir. 
 " nr^HO' it is my fixed determination to en- 
 *• X courage the addreflbs of no man whatever, 
 without the approbation of my guardians, yet I 
 " think myfelf too much obliged to the affcdioii 
 you have exprefTcd for me, to refufe you a fa- 
 vour ci" fo trifling a nature, as that you have 
 taken the pains to a/k. I will be at the place 
 '* you mention to morrow, fome time in the Icre- 
 *' noon ; but dcfire you will cxpc£t nothing hem 
 *' it, but a lafl. farewell, as you have prom. fed to 
 '' be contented with. Till then, i?dieu." 
 
 After finifhing this little billet, (he called the 
 
 maid, whom Saving had made his confidante, into 
 
 her chamber, and afked her, when ihe expc<fk'd he 
 
 C 2 would 
 

<#PG# 38>
28 ne HIST DRY of 
 
 would come for an anfwer ? To which the other 
 replied, that he had appointed her to meet him at 
 the corner of the flreet very early in the morning, 
 before any of the windows Were open. " Well 
 *' then," faid Mifs Betfy fmiling, and putting the 
 letter into her hands, " give him this. I do it for 
 '* your fake, Nanny; for, I fuppofc, you will 
 " have a double fee on the delivery." " The 
 *' gentleman is too much in love,'* anfwered (lie, 
 '* not to be grateful." 
 
 Mils Betfy pafl the remainder of that day, and 
 the enfiiing night, with that tranquillity which is in- 
 feparable from a mind unincumbered with paffion ; 
 but the next morning remembering her promife, 
 while lady MellaGn and Mifs Flora were engaged 
 with the beaux and bc-lles at iheir levee, (he flipt 
 out, and taking a chair at the end of the ftrcet, 
 went to the milliner's according to appointment. 
 She doubted not but the impatience of her lover 
 would have brought him there long before her, and 
 was very much amazed to find herfelf the firil 
 comer. She knew not, however, but fome extra- 
 ordinary accident, unforefeen by hirn, might have 
 happened to detain him longer than he expefied, 
 and from the whole courfe of his paft behaviour, 
 could find no fhadow of rcafon to fufpc6t him of a 
 wilful remlllnefs. She fat down in the fhop, and 
 amufed herfelf with talking to the woman on the 
 new modes of drefs, and fuch like ordinary mat- 
 ters ; but made not the Icaft mention of the motive 
 which had brought her there that morning : and 
 \ho Other, not knowing whether it would be pro- 
 per to take any notice, was alfo filent on that occa- 
 iion ; but Mifs Betfy obferved, fhe often turned her 
 head towards tlie window, and ran to the door, 
 looking up and down the flreet, as if fhe expe6ted 
 fomcbody, who was not yet come. 
 
 Mifs- 
 

<#PG# 39>
Af//^ Betsy Thoughtless. 25 
 
 M'lfs Betfy could not forbear being fhcckcd at a 
 difappointment, which was the laft thing in the 
 world {he could have apprehended. She had, not- 
 withftanding, the patience to wait from a little palt 
 eleven 'till near two o'clock, expecting, during e- 
 very moment of that time, that he would cither 
 come, cr (end fome excufe for not doing (o ; hut 
 finding he did neither, and that it was near the 
 hour in which Mr. Goodman ufually dined, (he 
 took her kave of the woman, and went home full 
 of agitations. 
 
 l^he maid, who was in the fecrct, happening to 
 open the door, and Mils Betfy looking round, and 
 perceiving there was nobody in hearing, faid to lier, 
 *' Nanny, are you fure you delivered my letter 
 " fafeintoMr. Saving's hands?" *' Sure! Mifs,'* 
 *' cried the wench, " yes, as fure as I am alive, 
 ** and he gave me a good queen Anne's guinea for 
 " my trouble : — 1 have not had time fmce to 
 " put it up," continued £he, taking it out of her 
 bofom, " here it is." " Well, then, what did 
 " he fay on receiving it f" faid Mifs Betfy. I ne- 
 " verfaw a man fo tranfported,'* replied (he, '' he 
 " put it to his mouth, and kifled it with fuch ^j[i 
 *' eagernefs, I thought he would have devoureu 
 " it." Mifs Betfy asked no farther queftions, but 
 went up to her chamber to pull o{{' her hood, not 
 being able to know how fhe ought to judge of this 
 adventure. 
 
 She was foon called down to dinner, but lier 
 mind was too much perplexed to fufter her to cat 
 much. 
 
 She was extremely uneafy the whole day, for 
 an explanation of what at preient feemed fo ni)^- 
 flerious, and this gave her little lefs pain, tha'n, 
 perhaps, fhe would have felt had fhe been poflcf- 
 fed with an equal (hare of love ; but in the even- 
 ing her natural vivacity got the better, and not 
 C 3 doubting 
 

<#PG# 40>
50 The HISTORY of 
 
 doubting but the next morning fhe fhould receive a 
 Jetter with a full eclaircifement of this affair, fhe 
 enjoyed the fame fwcet repofe, as if nothing had 
 happened to ruffle her temper. 
 
 The morning came, but brought no billet from 
 that once obfequious lover : — -» the next, and three 
 or four fuccceding ones were barren of the fruit (he 
 io m.uch expected. What judgment could fhe form 
 
 of an event fo odd ? She could not bring her- 
 
 felf to think Saving had taken pains to procure a 
 icndezvous with her, on purpofe to difappoint 
 and affront her ; and was not able to conceive any 
 probable means, by which he fliould be prevented 
 irom writing to her. Death only flie thought could 
 be. an excufe for him, and had that happened fhe 
 ihould have heard of it. Sometimes fhe fancied 
 that the maid had been treacherous ; but when fhe 
 confirlercd, fhe could get nothing by being fo, and 
 that it was, on the contrary, rather her intereft to 
 be firicere, flie rejected that fuppofition. The va- 
 rious conje(Stures, which by turns came into her 
 ^lead, rendered her however exceflively difturbed, 
 and in a fituation which deferved fomefhare of pity, 
 had not her pride kept her from revealing either her 
 c!. .content, or the motives of it, to any one perfon 
 in the world. 
 
 C H A P. V. 
 
 dnialns ncihlng very extraordinary^ yet fuch things 
 as are highly proper to be known, 
 
 I THINK it is generally allowed, that there are 
 few emotions of the mind more uneafy than 
 fufpence. Not the extreme youth of Mifs Betfy, 
 not all h er natural chearfulnefs, nor her perfed in- 
 difference for the fjn of alderman Saving, could en- 
 able 
 

<#PG# 41>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 31 
 
 nabie her to throw off the vexation, in which his 
 Jate behaviour had involved her. Had the motive 
 been the moft mortifying of any that could be 
 imagined to her vanity, pride and refcntmcnt would 
 then have come to her afTiftance : (he would 
 
 have defpifed the author of the infult, and, in time, 
 have forgot the infult itfelf j but the uncertainty in 
 what manner (he ought to think of the man, and 
 this laft action of his, made both dwell much longer 
 on her mind, than otherwife they would \u\vc done. 
 As the poet truly fays. 
 
 '* When puzzling doubts the anxiuus bofom 
 " ftize, 
 
 •* To know the word is fume degree of eafe." 
 
 This is a maxim which will hold good, even 
 when the ftrongeft and moft violent pafTions ope- 
 rate ; but Mifs Betfy was poillfled of no more than 
 a bare curiofity, which as (he had as yet no other 
 fenfation, which demanded gratihcation, was fufii- 
 ciently painful to her. 
 
 It was about ten, or twelve days, that (he con- 
 tinued to labour under this dilemma ; but at ihc 
 expiration of that time, was partly relieved from it 
 by the following means. 
 
 Mr. Goodman happening to meet alderman Sa- 
 ving, with whom he had great bufmefs, upon 
 'Change, defired he would accompany him to an 
 adjacent tavern, ""i o which the other complied ; 
 but with an air much more grave and refcrved, 
 than he was accuftomed to put on. with a pcr- 
 fon whom he had known for a great number 
 of years, and was concerned with in fome affairs 
 of trafHck j they went together to the Hiip ta- 
 vern. 
 
 After having ended what tlicy iiad to fay to 
 
 each other upon bufmefs, '* Mr. Goodman," 
 
 faid the alderman, ** we have long been friends, I 
 
 *' always thought you an honeft, fair-dealin2; man, 
 
 C 4 ^'' and 
 

<#PG# 42>
S2 ne HISTORY df 
 
 " arid am, therefore, very much furprizcd you 
 " fhould go about to put upon me in the manner 
 *' you have lately done." '* Put upon you, Sir," 
 cried the merchant, ^' 1 know not what you mean,, 
 *' and am very certain I i>cver did any thing that 
 *' might call in queftion my integrity, either to 
 *' you or any one t\{<i.^^ " It was great integrity 
 " indeed," refumed the alderman, with a Ineer, 
 *' to endeavour to draw my only fon into a chn- 
 *' deftine marriage, with a girl you have at your 
 '^ houfe." Mr. Goodman was aftoniftied, as weU 
 he might, at this accufation, and perceiving by 
 ibme other words that the alderman let fall, that 
 he was well acquainted with the love young Savmg 
 had profefibd for Mifs Betfy, frankly related to 
 him all that he knew of the courtfhip, and the 
 method he had taken to put a ftop to it. " That 
 " was not enough, Sir," cried the alddrman ha- 
 
 *' itily, you fhoukl have told me of it.^ Do 
 
 " you think youngfolks, like them, would have re* 
 
 " garded your forbidding? No, noi I'll war- 
 
 ** rant jou they would have found fome Way or o* 
 *' ther to come together before now, and the boy 
 " miglit have been ruined, if I had not been iji- 
 *' formed by other hands how things were carried 
 "on, and put it out of the power of any of you 
 ** to imppfe upon me. The girl may fpread iier 
 '* nets to catch fome other woodcock, if flie can, 
 <« .-*— , thanks to heaven, and my own prudence, 
 *' my Ton is far enough out of her reach." 
 
 Mr. Goodman, though one of tl>e beft natured 
 men in the world, could not keep himfelf from be-, 
 \\Y^ a little ruffled at the alderman's difcourfe, and, 
 told him, that though he had been far from encou- 
 raging Mr. Saving's inclinations, and fhould always 
 think it the duty of a fon to confult his father in 
 every thing he did, efpecially in fo material a 
 point as that cf marriage 5 . yet he faw no rea- 
 
 fofl 
 

<#PG# 43>
M/7i Betsy Thoughtless. 3^ 
 
 fon for treating Mifs Betfy with contempt, as 
 flic was of a good family, had a vtry prctry 
 fortune of her own, and fuitable acconiplifh- 
 ments. 
 
 " You take a great deal of pains to fet her off," 
 faid the alderman, " and fince you married a 
 " court-lady not worth a groat, have got all the 
 *' romantic idle notions ot the other end of the 
 " town, as finely as if you had been bred there. 
 ** A good family ! — very pleafant i'faith. Will 
 
 ** a good family go to market ? Will it buy a 
 
 *' joii>t of mutton at the butclier's ? Or a prct- 
 
 " ty gown at the mercer's ? Then, a pretty for- 
 
 " tune you fay ; enough it may be to fquand- 
 
 " er away at cards and mafqueradc?, f(^r a month 
 or two. She has fuitable acccmplifliments too ? 
 yes, indeed, they arc fuitable ones, 1 be- 
 lieve : I fuppofe iQie can fing, dance, and 
 
 jabber a little French ; but I'll be han?:cd if flie 
 knows how to make a pye, or a pudding, or to 
 ** teach her maid to do it." 
 
 The reflection on lady Mellafin, in the beginning 
 of this fpeech, fo much incenfcd Mr. Goodman, 
 that he could fcarce attend to the latter part of it ; 
 ■■ • he forbore interrupting hini, however, but as 
 foon as he had done fpeaking, replied in terms 
 which fliewed his refentm?nt. In fine, fuch hot 
 words pafi'ed between them, as, had they been 
 )'Ounger men, might have produced woife confe- 
 quences ; — - but the fpiiit of both being equally 
 evaporated in mutual reproaches, they grew m^re 
 calm, and, at laft, talked themfclves into as g; od 
 harmony as ever. Mr. Goodman faid, he was 
 forry that he had been prevailed upon, by theyo»:ng 
 man's entreaties, to keep his court|liip to Mifs Bctfy 
 a fecret ; and the ajderman begged pardon in his 
 turn, for having faid any thing difrefpectful of ladv 
 Mellafin, 
 
 C < On 
 

<#PG# 44>
34 "^he HISTORY of 
 
 On this they fhook hands, another half pint of 
 fherry was called for, and before they parted, the 
 alderman acquainted Mr, Goodman, that to pre- 
 vent entirely all future correfpondence between his 
 fon and Mifs Bctfy, he had fent him to Holland 
 fome d^ys ago, without letting him know any 
 thing of his intentions, 'till every thing was ready 
 for his embarkation. " I fent," faid he, *' the 
 *' night before he was to go, his portmanteau, and 
 *' what other luggage I thought he would have 
 *' occafion for, to the inn where the Harwich 
 •' ftage puts up, and* making him be called up very 
 *' early in the morning, told him, he muft go a 
 *' little way out of town with me, upon extraor- 
 
 *' dinary bufinefs : he Teemed very unwilling, 
 
 *' fuid he had appointed that morning to meet a 
 •' gei)ileman, and begged 1 would delay the jour*- 
 •* ney to the next day, or even till the afternoon. 
 *' What caufed this backwardnefs, I cannot ima- 
 *' gine, for I think it was impofTible he could 
 •' know mv defigns on this fcore ; but, whatever 
 *' was in his head, I took care to difappoint it : ■ ■ 
 *' I liliened to none of his excufes, nor trufted 
 *' him out of my fight, but forced him to go with 
 " me to the coach, in which I had fccured a cou- 
 " pie of places. He was horridly fhocked when 
 *' he found where he was going, and would fain 
 *' have perfwaded me to repeal his banifliment, as 
 
 " he called it: I laughed in my flecve, but 
 
 ** took no notice of the real motive 1 had for fend- 
 '* ing him away, and told him, there was an ab- 
 •' folute neceflity for his departure ; — that I 
 ** had a bufinefs of the greateft importance at 
 •' Rotterdam, in which I could truft nobody but 
 *' himfelf to negotiate, and that he would find, in 
 '* his tiunk, letters and other papers, which would 
 ^* inftrud him how to adt, 
 
 "In 
 

<#PG# 45>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 35 
 
 " In fine," continued the alderman, *' I went 
 *' with him aboard, fiaid with him till they we»v 
 ** ready to weigh anchor, then returned, and ftood 
 •' on the beach till the (hip failed quite out of 
 *' fight, fo that if my gentleman had a thought 
 *' cf writing to his miftrefs, he had not tlic Itall 
 ^' opportunity for it." He added, that he did not 
 altoget'ier deceive his fon, having, indeed, fomc 
 affairs to tranfad at Rotterdam, thougli they were 
 rot of the mighty confequcncc he had pretended ; 
 but which he had, by a private letter to his agent 
 there, ordered fliould be made appear as intricate 
 and perplexed aspofiihle, that the young gentleman's 
 jcturn might be delayed as long as there was any 
 plaufible excufe for detaining him, without his feeing 
 through the rcafon of it. 
 
 Mi-, (joodman praifcd the alderman's difcreiion 
 in the whole conduct of this bufincfs, and to atone 
 for having been prevailed upon to keep ycui^g 
 Saving's Jecrctfrom him, cfl:'erid to make inlci- 
 crt with a fiicnd he had at the poft-ofiice, to 
 llop any letter fhould be directed for Mifs Belfy 
 'I'houghtlcfs, bv the way of Holland ; *' by which 
 ** means," faid he, *' all communication between 
 *' the young people will foon be put an end to ; 
 •* he will grow weary of writing when he receives 
 *' no anfvi'crs, and (be of thinking of him as a 
 •* lover, when (he finds he ceafes to tell her lie is 
 •* fo." 
 
 The alderman was ready to hug his old friend 
 for this propofal, which, it is certain, he m.ide in 
 the fincerity of his heart, for they no fooner 
 parted, than he went to the office, and fulfilled his 
 promife. 
 
 When he came home, in order to hinder ?vTii's 
 Betfy from expeding to hear any thing more of Mr. 
 Saving, he told her he had been treated by the al- 
 derman pretty roughly, on account of the encr u-' 
 
 X32:ement 
 

<#PG# 46>
so <Ibe HIST ORY of 
 
 ragement had been given in his houfe to the amo- 
 rous addrefles had been made to her by his fon ; 
 *' and,'* added he, *' the old man is fo incenfed 
 *' againii: him, for having a thought of that kind 
 '• in your favour, that he has fent him beyond 
 
 << Tea, 1 know not to what part ; but it 
 
 '"•' feems he is never to come back, till he has given 
 " full aflli ranees the liking he has for you is utterly 
 '' worn ofF." 
 
 *' Fie might have fparcd himfelf the pains," faid 
 Mifs Betfy, blufliing with difdain, " his fon could 
 *' have informed him, how little I was inclinable 
 '* to iiilen to any thing he faid on the fcore of 
 *' love ; and I myfelf, if he had afked me the 
 -' queftion, would have given him ihe flrongeft 
 ** afiurances that words could form, that if ever I 
 " changed my condition, which heaven knows I 
 '' am far from thinking on as yet, I ihould ne- 
 '* ver be prevailed upon to do it, by any merits his 
 ** fon was pofTtiTed of." 
 
 Mr. Goodman congratulated her on the irdif- 
 ferencs flie exprefled, and told her, he hoped fne 
 would always continue in the fame humour, till 
 an offer which promifcd more fatisfadtion in mar- 
 riage ihould happen to be made. 
 
 Nothing more was faid on this head ; but Mifs 
 Betfy, on ruminating on what Mr. Goodman had 
 related, eafily imagined, that the day in which he 
 had been fent av/ay, was the fame on which he 
 had appointed to meet her, and therefore excufcd 
 his not coming as a thing unavoidable ; yet as fhe 
 knew not the ^Tccaution his father had taken, was 
 not fo ready to forgive him for not fending a line to 
 prevent her waiting fo long for him at the habit- 
 fiiop. She could not, however, when flie reflected 
 on the whole tenour of his deportment to her, 
 think it pofTible he fnould all at once become 
 guilty of wilfully omitting, what even common 
 
 gwd 
 

<#PG# 47>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 37 
 
 good manners and decency required. She foon 
 grew weary, however, of troubling herfelf about 
 the matter, and a very few days ferved to make 
 her lofe even the memory of it. 
 
 CHAP. VI. 
 
 May be of fome fervice to the ladies^ efpeclaUy the 
 younger Jort^ if well attended to, 
 
 MISS Betfy had now no perfon that profeflcd 
 a ferious paflion for her ; but as (he had yet 
 never fcen the man capable of infpiring her with 
 the leaft emotions of tendernefs, Ihe was quite eafy 
 as to that point, and wifhcd nothing beyond what 
 {lie enjoyed, the pleafure of being told fhe was ve- 
 ry handfomc, and gallanted about by a great num- 
 ber of thofe, who go by the name of very pretty 
 fellows. Pleafed with the praife, flie regarded not 
 the condition cr merits of the praifer, and fuffered 
 herfelf to be treated, prefentcd, and fquir'd about 
 to all public places, either by the rake, the man of 
 honour, the wit, or the fool, the married, as well 
 as the unmarried, without diftin^iion, and juft as 
 either fell in her way. 
 
 Such a conduct as this could not fiul of laying 
 
 her open to the cenfure of malicious ton[i;ues :- 
 
 the agreeablcnefs of her perfon, her wit, and the 
 many accomplilhments fhe was miftrefs of, made 
 her envied and hated, even by thofe who profc fled 
 the greatefl friendfhip for her. Several there were 
 who, though they could fcarce fupport the vexati- 
 on it gave them to fee her fo much preferred to 
 themfelves, yet chofc to be a? much with her as 
 pofTible, in the cruel hope of finding fome frefh mat- 
 ter wherewith to blaft hsr reputation. 
 
 Certain 
 

<#PG# 48>
38 ns HISTORY of 
 
 Certain it is, that tho' (he was as far removed, 
 as innocence itfelf, from all intent or wifh of com- 
 mitting a real ill, yet flic paid too little regard to 
 the appearances of it, and faid and did many things, 
 which the a6^ually criminal would be more cau- 
 tious to avoid. Hurried by an cxcefs of vanity, and 
 that love of pleafure (o natural to youth, fhe in- 
 dulged herfelf in liberties, of which fhe forefaw 
 not the confequences. 
 
 Lady Trufty, who fmcerely loved her, both for 
 her own fake, and that of her deccafed mother, 
 came more often to Mr. Goodman's than otherwifc 
 fhe would have done, on purpofe to obferve the 
 behaviour of Mifs Betfy : fhe had heard fome ac- 
 counts, which gave her great di{ratisfa6\ion ; but as 
 fhe was a Nvoman of penetration, flie cafily perceiv- 
 ed, that plain reproof was not the way to prevail 
 
 on her to reclaim the errors of her conuu(5^ ; 
 
 that (he mufl: be infenfibly weaned from what, at 
 prefent, (he took fo much delight in, and brouglit 
 into a different manner of living, by ways vvl)ich 
 ibould rather feem to flatter than clieck her vanity ; 
 file therefore earneflly wifhed to get her down with 
 her into L— — *e, Vv^here flie was foon going her- 
 felf ; but knew not how to afk her without making 
 the fame invitation to Mifs Flora, whofe company 
 file no way defired, and whofe example (he was 
 fenfiblc had very much contributed to give Mifs 
 Betfy that air of levity, which rendered her good 
 fenfe almoft ufelefs to her. . 
 
 This worthy lady happening to find her alone 
 one day, (a thing not very ufual) (lie afked, by way 
 of founding her inclination, if flie would not be 
 
 glad to fee L -e again ; to which fhe replied, 
 
 that there were many people for whom (he had a 
 very great refpe<5f, but the journey was too long 
 to be taken merely on the fcore of making a fhort 
 viftt i for flie owned flie did not like the coun- 
 try 
 

<#PG# 49>
A/(/} Betsy Thoughtless. 39 
 
 try well enough to continue in it for any length of 
 time. 
 
 Lady Trudy would fain have perfuaded her into 
 a better opinion of the place (he was born in, and 
 which moft of her family had pafled the. greateft 
 part of their lives in ; but Mifs Betfy was not to 
 be argued into any tolerable ideas of it, and plainly 
 told her ladyftiip, that what (he called a happy tran- 
 quil manner of fpending ones days, fccmed to her 
 little better than being buried alive. 
 
 From declaring her avcrfion to a country life, 
 fhe ran into fuch extravagant encomiums on thofe 
 various amufcments, v;hich London every day 
 prefented, that lady Trufty perceived it would not 
 be without great difficulty (he would be brought to 
 a more juft way of thinking : fhe concealed, how- 
 ever, as much as pofTible, the concern it gave her 
 to hear her cxprefs herfelf in this manner, content- 
 ing herfelf with faying, calmly, that London was, 
 indeed, a very agreeable place to live in, cfpecially 
 for young people, and the plcafurcs it afforded were 
 very elegant ; *' but then" faid (he, " the too tre- 
 " (]uent repetition of them, may fo much cngrofs 
 *' themind, as to take it cfF from other objecfi?, 
 '* wliicli ought to have their (hare in it: befides," 
 continued {he, " there are but too frequent proofs, 
 " that an innate principle of virtue is not always a 
 *' fufficient guard againft the many fnares laid for 
 ■" it, under the fhew of innocent pleafurcs, by 
 *' wicked and defigning perfons of both fcxes ; 
 ** nor can it be efteemed prudence to run ones 
 *' felf into dangers meerly to fliew our ftrcngth in 
 " overcoming them ; nor, perhaps, would evtn 
 *' thevi£lory turn always to our glory : the world 
 •' is cenforious, and feldcm ready to put the belt 
 .** conftru6tion on things ; fo that reputation may 
 *' fufFer, though virtue triumphs," 
 
 Mift 
 

<#PG# 50>
40 ne HIST ORY of 
 
 Mifs Betfy liftened to all this with a good deal of 
 
 attention. The impudent attempt Gayland had 
 
 made on her, came rrefh into her mind, and made 
 this lady*s rcmonftrances fink the deeper into it. 
 The power of refle6^ion being a little awakened in 
 her, fome freedoms alfo, not altogether confifteat 
 with ftrivH: modefty, which others had offered to 
 her, convinced her of the error of maintaining too 
 little referve ; flie thanked her kind advifer, and 
 promifed to obfervethe precepts flie had given. 
 
 Lady Trufty finding this good efFecR: of what (he 
 had faid, ventured to proceed fo far, as to give 
 fome hints, that the condu6l of Mifs Flora bad been 
 far from biamelefs ; and, therefore, purfued (he, 
 I fhould be glad, methinks, to fee you feparated 
 from that young lady, though it were but for d fmall 
 time; and then gave her to underftand, how great 
 a pleafure it would be to her, to ger her down with 
 
 her to L e, if it could be any way contrived, 
 
 that fhe could go without Mifs Flora. 
 
 " As I have been fo long from home," faid flie, 
 *' I know I fhill have ail the gentry round the 
 " country to welcome me at my return, and if you 
 *' fhould find the company lefs polite, than thofe 
 ** you leave behind, it will, at leafl, diverfify the 
 " fcene, and render the entertainments of London 
 " new to you a fecond time, when you come 
 " back." 
 
 Mifs Betfy found in herfelf a flrong inclination 
 to comply with this propofal, and told lady Trufty, 
 file fhould think herfelf happy in pafling the whole 
 fummer with her ; and as to Mifs Flora, the famie 
 offer might be made to her, without any danger of 
 her accepting it. ** I am not of your opinion," 
 faid ih(5 other ; " the girl has no fortune but what 
 ** Mr. Goodman fhall be pleafed to give her ; 
 *' wliich cannot be very confiderable, as he has a 
 '' nephew in the Eafl- Indies, whom he is ex- 
 
 " tremeiy 
 

<#PG# 51>
Mifs 'Betsy TnovanThiss, 41. 
 
 *' tremely fond of, and will make his Heir. Lady 
 *' Mellaiin would, therefore, catch at the oppor- 
 •' tunity of fending her daughter td a place where 
 ** there are fo many gentlemen of cltates, among 
 *f • whom flie might have a better chance for g€ft(ii>g 
 *' a hufband, than fhe can have in London, vv'here 
 " her chara6ler would fcarce entitle her to fuch a 
 ** hope. I will however,'* purfued fhe, " run 
 *' the rifque, and choofc rather to have a gueft, 
 " whofe company I do not Co well approve of, 
 " than be deprived of one I fo much value." 
 
 Mifs Betfy teftified the (ti\(e ihe had of her lady- 
 fliip's goodnefs, in the m-oft grateful and obliging 
 terms, and lady Mellafm, and Mifs Flora coming 
 home foon after, lady Trufly faid, (he was come 
 on purpofe to a(k permifTion for Mifs Flora and 
 Mifs Betfy to pafs two or three months with her, 
 down in L e. 
 
 Lady MelJafm, as the other had imagined, fcem- 
 ed extremely pleafed with the invitation, and tokl 
 her, fhe did her daughter a great deal of honour, 
 and fhe would take care things fhould be prepared 
 for both the young ladies to attend her, on her fet- 
 ting out. Lady Trufly then told her, fhe had fixed 
 the day for it, which was about a fortnight after 
 this converfatbn, and fome other matters relating 
 CO the journey being regulated, took her leave, 
 highly pleafed with the thoughts of getting Mifs 
 Betfy to a place, where fhe fliould have an oppor- 
 tunity of uftng her utmoft endeavours to improve 
 the good fhe found in her difpofition, and of v/ean- 
 ing her, by degrees, from any ill habits die might 
 have contracted in that Babel of mixed company Ihe 
 was accuflomed to at lady Mellafm's. 
 
 CHAP. 
 

<#PG# 52>
42 r^^ H I S T O R r cf 
 
 CHAP. VII. 
 
 Is a medly of various particulars^ which pave the 
 way for ?na tiers of mere confequence, 
 
 MISS Flora had now nothing in her head, but 
 the many hearts (he exped'led to capiivate, 
 
 vvlien fhe (hould arrive in L e ; and lady 
 
 Mellafin, who Toothed her in all her vanities, re- 
 folved to fpare nothing which ilie imagined would 
 contribute to that purpofe. Mils Bet(y, who had 
 the fame ambition, though for different ends, made 
 it alfo pretty much her ftudy to fet off, to the bcfl 
 advantage, the charms fhe had received from na- 
 ture. The important article of drefs now engruflcd 
 the whole converfation of thefe ladies The day, 
 after that in which lady Trufty had made the invi- 
 tation to the tv/o young ones, lady Mcllafm went 
 "with them. to the mercer's to buy fome filks : fhe 
 pitched on a very genteel new-fafhioned pattern for 
 her daughter ; but chofe one for Mifs Betfy, which, 
 though rich, feemed to her not well fancied ; fhe 
 teftificd her difapprobation, but lady Mellafm faid fo 
 much in the praife of it, and the mercer, either to 
 pleafe her, or becaufe he was defirous of getting it 
 fold, afTured Mifs Betfy that it was admired by e- 
 \q:Y body, that it was the neweft thing he had in his 
 fhop, and had already fold feveral pieces to ladies of 
 the firft quality : all this did not argue Mifs Betfy 
 into a liking of it ; yet between them flie was over- 
 perfuaded to have it. When thefe purchafes were 
 made, they went home, only flopped at the man- 
 tua-maker's in their way, to order her to come 
 that afternoon; lady Mellafin did no more than fet 
 them down, and then went on in the coach to make 
 a vifit. 
 
 The. 
 

<#PG# 53>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless: 43 
 The young ladies fell to reviewing their filks ; 
 but Mifs Betfy was no way fatisfied with her's : the 
 more fhe looked upon it, the worie it appeared to 
 her. " I fhali never wear this with any pleafure," 
 faid (he ; "I wifti the man had it in his fliop a- 
 " gain, for I think it quite ugly." Mifs Flora told 
 her, that (lie wondered at her, that the thing was 
 perfectly handfomc, and that my lady's judgment was 
 never before called in queftion. *' That may be,'* 
 replied Mifs Betfy, *' but certainly every one ought 
 " to pleafe their own fancy in the choice of their 
 " cloaths ; for my part I fhill never endure to Wc 
 *' myfelf in it." Not when their fancy happens to 
 *' differ from that of thofe who know better than 
 " themfclves what is fit for them." cried Mifs 
 Flora; " and, befides, have the power over them." 
 Slie fpoke this with {o much pertnefs, that Mifs 
 Betfy, who had a violent fpirit, was highly pro- 
 voked. '^ Power over them !" cried {he, " I do 
 *' not know what you mean, Mifs Flora ; Mr. 
 *' Goodman is one of my guardians indeed, but 
 *' I don't know why that fhould entitle his lady to 
 " direct me in what I (hall wear." 
 . Mr. Goodman, who happened to be looking 
 'over fomc papers in a little clofet he had within his 
 parlour, hearing part of this dif^ute, and finding it 
 was like to grow pretty warm, came out, in hopes 
 of moderating it. On hearino; Mifs Betfv's com- 
 plaint, he defired to fee the filk ; which being (hewn 
 him. *' 1 do not pretend," faid he, " to much 
 " underftanding in thefc things ; but, methinks, it 
 *' is very handfome." It would do well enougli 
 *' for winter, Sir," replied Mifs Betfy; *' but it 
 " is too hot and heavy for fummer ; befides, it is 
 '^' fo thick and clumfy, it would make me look as 
 *' big again as I am : Fll not wear it, I am refol- 
 . *' ved, in the country, whatever I do when I come 
 " to town in the dark weather." 
 
 <« Well," 
 

<#PG# 54>
44 "fh^ HISTORY of 
 
 " Well,'' faid Mr. Goodm.in, " I will Tpealc 
 •* to my lady to get it changed for foiTietiHirg clfc.** 
 '* Indeed, Sir/* cried Mifs Flora, *' lam fure my 
 *' mamma will do no fuch thing, and take ft very 
 " ill to hear it propofed." *« You need not put 
 *« yourfelf in any heat," replied Mifs Bctfy, *' I 
 " don't delire flie fhould be troubled any farther 
 " about it ; but, Sir," continued fhe, turning to 
 Mr. Goodman, '* I tliink I am now at an age ca- 
 •* pable of choofing for my fclf, in the article of 
 " drefs ; and as it has been fettled between you 
 ** and Sir Ralph Trufiry, that out of the income 
 *-* of my fortune, thirty pounds a year fhould be 
 *' allowed for my board, twenty pounds for my 
 •' pocket expences, and fifty for my cloaths, I 
 -*' think I ought to have the two latter entirely at 
 *' my own difpofal, and to lay it out as I think 
 " fit, and not be obliged, like a charity-child, to 
 *' wear whatever livery my benefaflor fl>all be 
 " pleafed to order." She fpoke this with fo much 
 fpleen, that Mr. Goodman was a little nettled at it, 
 and told her, that what his wife had done was out 
 of kindnefs and good will, which fince ftic did not 
 take as was meant, fhe fhould have her money to 
 do with as fhe would. 
 
 " That is all I defire," anfwered fhe, '' there- 
 *' fore be pleafed to let me have twenty guineas 
 *' now, or, if there does not remain fo much in 
 *' your hands, I will afk Sir Ralph to advance it, 
 " and you may return it to him when you fettle ac- 
 *' counts." *' No, no," cried the merchant ha- 
 ftily, " I fee no reafon to trouble my good friend, 
 *' Sir Ralph, on fuch a frivolous matter. You 
 *' fliall have the fum you mention, Mifs Betfy, 
 *' whether fo much remains out of the hundred 
 *' pounds a year fet apart for you fubfiftance, or 
 *' not, as I can but deduct it out of the next pay- 
 " ment 3 but I would have you manage with dif- 
 
 " cretion. 
 

<#PG# 55>
Ai//} Betsy THouGHTLE'is. 45 
 
 *' cretion, for you niny depend, that the furplus 6f 
 *' what was at firft agieed upon, fliall not be broke 
 " into, but laid up to increafc your fortune, which, 
 *' by the time you come of age, I hope, will be 
 *' pretty handfomely improved.'* 
 
 Mifs Bctfy then afTurcd him, that fhe doubted 
 not of his zeal for her intereft, and hoped Ihe had 
 not offended him in any thing fhe had faid, *' No, 
 " no," replied he. " I always make allowances 
 *' for the little impatiencies of pcrfons of your fex 
 '^ and age, efpecially when drefs is concerned." 
 In fpeaking thcfe words, he opened his bureau, and 
 took out twenty guineas, which he immediately 
 gave her, making her fiifl fign a memorandum of 
 it. Mifs P'Jora was all on fire to have offered fome- 
 thing in oppofition to this, but durfl not do it, and 
 the mantua-maker that inftant coming in, flie went 
 up ftairs with her into her chamber, leaving Mifs 
 Betfy and Mr. Goodman together ; the former of 
 whom, being eager to go about what fhe Intended, 
 ordered a hackney coach to be called, and taking 
 the filk with her, went directly to the fliop where 
 it vvas bought. 
 
 The mercer at firfl feemed unwilling to tzke it 
 again ; but on her telling him, (he would always 
 make ufe of him, for every tiling fhe wanted in his 
 way, and would then buy two fuits of him, he at 
 lafl confented. As flie was extremely curious in 
 every thing relating to her fhape, flie made choice 
 of a pink coloured French luted ring, to the end, that 
 the plaits lying flat, would flicw the beauty of her 
 waiite to more advantage; and to atone for the 
 flig!unefs of the filk, purchafed as much of it as 
 would flounce the ficeves, and the petticoat from 
 top to bottom : fhe made the mercer alfo cut off a 
 fuf^Icient quantity of a rich green Venetian fattin, 
 . to make her a riding habit ; and as (he came home 
 bought a filver trimming for it of Poiat D'Efpagne ; 
 
 all 
 

<#PG# 56>
46 Us HISTORY of 
 
 all which, v/ith the filk {he difliked in exchanges 
 did not amount to the money {lie had received from 
 Mr. Goodman. 
 
 On her return, {he afked the footman, who o- 
 pened the door, if the mantua-makcr was gone ; 
 but he not being able to inform her, (he ran hallily 
 up {lairs to Mils Flora's chamber, which, indeed, 
 was alfo her own 5 for they lay together : {he was 
 about to bounce in, but found the door was locked, 
 ^nd the key taken out on the infide. This very 
 much furprifed her, efpccially as {he thought {he 
 had heard Mifs Flora's Voice, as {he was at the 
 top of the {lair-cafe ; wanting, therefore, to be fa- 
 tisiied who was with her, {he went as foftly as {he 
 could into lady Mellafin's dreiTing-room, which was 
 parted from the chamber but by a flight wainfcoat : 
 Ihe put her ear clofe to the pannel, in order to dif- 
 cover the voices of them that fpoke, and finding, 
 by fome light that came through a crack or flaw in 
 the boards, her eyes, as v/ell as cars, contributed to 
 a difcovery fhe little cxpe<5led. In fine, {he plainly 
 perceived Mifs Flora, and a man rife off the bed ; 
 {he could not at firft difcern who he was, but, on 
 his turning to go out of the room, knew him to be 
 no other than Gayland. They went out of the 
 chamber together, as gently as they could 5 and 
 tho' Mifs Betfy might, by taking three {leps, have 
 met them in the pafiage, and have had an opportu- 
 nity of revenging herfelf on Mifs Flora for the late 
 airs {he had given herfelf, by {hewing, how near {lie 
 vv^as to the fccne of infamy {he had been ading ; 
 yet the Ihock ihe felt herfelf, on being witnefs of 
 ir, kept lier immoveable for feme time, and {he 
 fuflcred ihcm to depart without the mortification of 
 thinking any one knew of their being together, in 
 the manner they were. 
 
 This young lady, who though, as I have already 
 taken aotice, was of too vulaiile and gay a difpo^ 
 
 fiiion, 
 

<#PG# 57>
M(/jr Betsy Thouchtles?. '47 
 
 fidon, hated any thing that had the Jeaft tin£^ure of 
 indecency, was (o much difconcerted at the difco- 
 very fhe had made, that fhe had not power to ftir 
 from the place fhe was in, much \tU to refolve 
 how to behave in this affair ; that is, whether it 
 would hi beft, or not, to let Mifs Flora know (he 
 was in the fecret of her fhame, or to fufFer her to 
 think herfelf fecure. 
 
 She was, however, beginning to meditate on 
 this point, when flie heard Mifs Flora come up 
 flairs, calling at every ftep, «' Mifs Betfy !— Mil's 
 
 *' Betfy! where are you ?" Gayland was 
 
 gone, and his young miftrcfs being told Mifs Betfy 
 was come home, gueffed it was (he who had given 
 an interruption to their pleafures, by coming to the 
 door ; fhe, therefore, as fhe could not imagine her 
 fo perfc(51:ly convinced, contrived to difguife the 
 whole, and worft of the truth, by revealing a part 
 of it ; and as foon as fhe had found her, " Lord, 
 *' Mifs Betfy!" cried (he, with an unparalell'd 
 afTurance, " where have you been ? — how do you 
 " think I have been ferved by that curfed toad 
 *' Gayland ? he came up into our chamber, where 
 *' the mantua-makcr and I were, and as focn as 
 *' fhe was gone, locked the door, and began to 
 " kifs and touze mefo, that I protcft I was fr'ght- 
 ** ed almofl out of my wits. The devil meant no 
 ** harm though, I believe, for I got rid of him 
 «' eafy enough ; but I wifh you had rapp'.d hear- 
 '' tily at the door, and obliged him to open it, 
 '^ that we both might have rated him for his 
 *' impudence." " Some people h^ve a great deal 
 " of impudence, indeed," replied Mifs i3etfy, a- 
 ftonifhed at her manner of bearing it off. '' Aye, 
 " fo they have, my dear, rejoined the other, with 
 " a carelefs air ; but, prithee, where have you 
 " been rambling by yourfcif ? *' No farther thaji 
 
 " Bedford- 
 

<#PG# 58>
48 The HISTORY cf 
 
 •« Bedford-ftreet," anfwered Mifs Betfy : « you 
 ^' may fee on what errand," continued (he, point- 
 ing to thefilks, which (lie had laid down on a chaif. 
 Mifs Flora prefently ran to the bundle, examined 
 what it contained, and cither being in a better hu- 
 mour, or afFe(5ting to be fo, than when they talked 
 on this head in the parlour, teftified no difapproba- 
 tion of what fhe had done ; but, on the contrary, 
 talked to her in fuch foft obliging terms, that Mifs 
 Betfy, who had a great deal of good-nature, when 
 not provoked by any thing that feerned an afFrorVt 
 to herfelf, could not find in her heart to fay any 
 thing to give her confufion. 
 
 When lady Mellafm came home, and was in- 
 formed how Mifs Betfv had behaved, in relation to 
 the filk, fhe at firft put on an air full of refentment ; 
 but finding the other waiited neither v/it nor fpirit 
 to defend her own caufe, and not caring to break 
 •with her, efpeciaily as her daughter was going with 
 
 ■her to L — ^e, foon grew more moderate, and, 
 
 at length, affeded to think no more of it. Certain 
 it is, however, that this affair, filly as it was, and, 
 as one would think, infignificant in itfelf, lay broil- 
 ing in the minds of both motlu^r and daughter, and 
 *they waited only for an opportunity of venting their 
 ■fpite, in fuch a manner, as fhould not make theria 
 appear to have the lead tindture of fo foul and meah 
 a paflion ; but as neither of them were capable 6f 
 a finccre friendfhrp, and had no real regard for any 
 one befide themfelves, their difpleafure was of littfe 
 confeqvjcnce. 
 
 Preparations for the journey of the young ladiefi, 
 feemed, for the prcfent, to employ all their thoughts, 
 and diligence enough was ufed to get everything 
 ready a/,ainft the time prefixed, which wanted but 
 three days of being expiied, when an unforefecn 
 accident put an cntir-e flop to. it. 
 

<#PG# 59>
Adifs Betsy Thoughtless. 49 
 • Mifs Betfv received a letter from her brother, 
 Mr. Francis Thoughtlefs, accompanied with ano- 
 ther to Mr. Goodman, acquainting them, tliat he 
 had obtained leave from the head of the college, to 
 pafs a month in London ; that he fhould fet out 
 from Oxford in two days, and hoped to enjoy the 
 fatisfadlion of being with them in twelve hours after 
 his letter. What could {he now do ? it would 
 have been a fin, not only againft natural affection, 
 but againft the rules of common good manners, to 
 have left the town, either on the news of his arri- 
 val, or immediately after it ; nor could lady Trufty 
 expert, or defire file fhould entertain a thought of 
 doing fo: (lie was too wife, and to good, not to 
 K, confider the intereft of families very much depended 
 on the fl:ri£l union among tiie branches of it ; and 
 that the natural affeclion between brothers and 
 fiflers, could not be too much cultivated. Far, 
 therefore, from infiftin^on thcpromife Mifs Betfy 
 had made of going with her into the countrv, flie 
 congratulated her on the happy difappointment, and 
 told her, that flie (liould receive her with a double fa- 
 tisfadion, if after Mr. Francis returned to Oxford, 
 fne would come and pafs what then remained of the 
 fummer feafon with her. This, Mifs.Betfy aCured 
 her ladyfliip, fhe would do ; fo that, according to 
 all appearance, the benefits flie might have received, 
 by being under the eye of fo excellent an inftruc- 
 trefs, were but delayed, not lolh 
 
 CHAP. VIII. 
 
 Relates hoiv^ by a concurrence of odd clrcun-ijlance^^ 
 Mifs Betfy was brcught pretty near the cri/is of 
 her fate y and the means by which foe efcaped. 
 
 M 
 
 R. Francis Thoughtlefs arrived in town the 
 very evening before the day in which Sir 
 Vol. 1. D . Ralph 
 

<#PG# 60>
50 The HISTORY^/ 
 
 Ralph Trully and his lady were to fct out for 
 
 L e. They had not fecn this young gentle* 
 
 man fi nee 'the melancholy occafion of his father's 
 funeral, and would have been glad to have had 
 fome time with him ; but could no way put ofF 
 their journey, as word was fent of the day in which 
 they expeded to be at home : Sir Ralph knew very 
 well, that a great number of his tenants, and 
 friends, would meet him on the road, and a letter 
 would not reach them foon enough to prevent them 
 from being difappointcd : they fupped with him, 
 however, at Mr. Goodman's, who would not per- 
 mit him to have any other home than his houfe, 
 during his ftay in town. Lady Trufty, on taking 
 leave of Mifs Betfy, faid to her, (he hoped fhe would 
 remember her promife when her brother was re* 
 turned to Oxford ; on which {he replied, that (he 
 could not be fo much an enemy to her own happi- 
 nefs as to fail. 
 
 Mifs Betfy and this brother had been always ex* 
 tremely fond of each other, and the length of time 
 they had been afunder, and the improvement which 
 that time had made in both, heightened their mu^ 
 tual fatistadion in meeting. 
 
 All that troubled Mifs Betfy now, was, that her 
 brother happened to come to London at a feafon of 
 the year, in which he could not receive the lealt 
 fatisfacStion : the king was gone to Hanover, all the 
 foreign minifters, and great part of the nobility, at- 
 tended him, and the reft were retired to their coun- 
 try feats ; fo that an entire flop was put to all pub- 
 lic diverfions worth feeing. There were no plays, 
 no operas, no masquerades, no balls, no public 
 {hews, except at the little theatre in the Hay-mar- 
 ket, then known by the name of F g's fcan- 
 
 dal fliop ; becaufe he frequently exhibited there 
 certain drolls, or, more properly, inve61ives againft 
 file miniilry : in doing which it appears extremely 
 
 probable, 
 

<#PG# 61>
A///Jr Be TSY Thought LESS. ^r 
 
 probable, that he had two views ; the one to get 
 money, which he very much wanted, from fuch as 
 delighted in low humour, and could not diftinguifti 
 truefatire from fcurrility; and the other, in the hope 
 of having fomc poft given him by thofe whom he 
 had abufed, in order to filence his dramatic talent. 
 But it is not my bufmefs to point our cither the me- 
 rit of that gentleman's performances, ^r the motives 
 he had for writing them, as the town is perfedliy 
 acquainted both with his abilities and fucccfs ; and ' 
 has fince feen him, with aftonifhment, Vv'riggle 
 himfclf into favour, by pretending to cajole ihofe 
 he had not the power to intimidate. 
 
 But though there were none of the diverfions I 
 have mentioned, nor Ranelagh at that time thought 
 of, nor Vauxhall, Mary-lc- bone, nor Cuper's- gar- 
 dens, in the repute they fmce have been, the young 
 gentleman found fufficient to entertain him : empty 
 as the town was, lady Mellafm was net without 
 company, who made frequent parties of picafure, 
 and when nothing elfe was to be found for recre- 
 ation, cards filled up the void. 
 
 Nothing materia] enough to be inferted in this hi- 
 ftory happened to Mifs Betfy, during the time her 
 brother ftayed, till one evening, as the family were 
 fitting together, fome difcourfe concerning Oxford 
 coming on the tapis, Mr. Francis fpoke fo large- 
 ly in the praife cf the wholefomencfs of the air, 
 the many fine walks and gardens with which 
 the place abounded, and the good company that 
 were continually rcforting to it, that Mifs Betfy 
 
 cried out, {he longed to fee it, Mifs Flora faid 
 
 the fame. 
 
 On this, the young gentleman gave them an In- 
 vitation to go down with him, when he went, fay- 
 ing, they never could go at a better time, as both 
 the afTizes and races were to be in about a month. 
 Mifs Betfy faid, fuch a j^unt would vafily delight 
 D 2 her. 
 

<#PG# 62>
52 The HIST ORY of 
 
 lier. Mils Flora ecchoed her approbation, and 
 added, ihe wiftied my lady would confent, " I 
 *' have no obje(Slion to make to it," replied lady 
 Mellafin, " as you will have aconduflor, who, I 
 " know, will be very careful of you." Mr. Good^ 
 man's confent was alfo a(ked, for the fake of form, 
 though every one knew the opinion of his wife, was 
 ofitfclf, a fuffident fandlion. 
 
 Though it is highly probable, that Mifs Bctfy 
 was much better pleafed with this journey, than (he 
 
 would have been with that to L e, yet file. 
 
 thought hei felf obliged, both in gratitude and good 
 manners, to v/rite to lady Trufty, and make the 
 beft excufe fhe could for her breach of promife, 
 which fhe did in thefe terms. 
 
 To Lady Trusty. 
 Mo/i dear and honoured niadam^ 
 c< Tft /r Y brother Frank being extremely defirous 
 '' IVl of ihevvingMifs Flora and myfelf the cu- 
 <« riofities of Oxford, has obtained leave from 
 <' Mr. Goodman, and lady Mellafm, for us to ac- 
 <' company him to that place. I am afraid the 
 «'. feafon will be too far advanced, for us to take a 
 
 «' journey to L e at our return ; therefore 
 
 <« flatter myfelf your ladyfhip will pardon the in- 
 *«. dilpenfable neceffity I am under of deferring, 
 . «' till next fpring> the happinefs I propofed in wait- 
 "' ingon you, "All here prefent my worthy guar- 
 <v dian, and your ladyfhip, with their beft rcfpe^^s, 
 «* I beg mine may be equally acceptable, and that 
 " you will always continue to favour with your 
 <«' oood wifties, her, who is, 
 
 *' With the moft perfect efteem, 
 
 *' Madrim, 
 «^ Your hdyfiiip'i nioft obliged, 
 " And moil obedient fervant, 
 
 ^' E. I'HOUGPiTLESS." 
 
 The 
 

<#PG# 63>
M//} Bs-TSY Thoughtless. 59 
 
 The time for the young gentleman's departure' 
 being arrived, they went together in the flage, at- 
 tended by a footman of Mr. Goodman's, whom 
 lady Mcllafm would needs fend with them, In order 
 to ;i;ive the young ladies an air of dignity. 
 
 Thev found, on their arrival at that juftly cele- 
 brated feat of learning, that Mr. Francis had given 
 no greater eulogiums on if, than it merited : they 
 were charmed with the fine library, the muf^um, 
 the magnificence of the halls, belonging to the fc- 
 veral colleges, the phyfic-garden, and other curi- 
 ous walks ; but that which above all the reft gave 
 the mod fatisfadion to Mifs Bctfy, as well as to 
 her companion, was that refpedful gallantry with 
 which rhcy found themfelves treated, by the gen- 
 tlemen of the univcrfity. Mr. Francis was extremely 
 bcl'jvcd amongft th.cm, on account of his aftability, 
 politcnefs, and good-humour, and they fcemcd glad 
 of an opportunity of fhcwing the regard they had 
 for the brother, by paying all manner of alBdultics 
 to the fifter ; he gave the ladies an elegant enter- 
 tafnmcnt at his own rooms, to which alfo fomi? 
 of thofe with whom he was the moft intimate were 
 invited. All thefe thought themfelves bound to 
 return the fame compliment : the company of eve- 
 ry one prefent were defired to their refpe<£livc a- 
 partments ; and as each of thefe gentlemen had, 
 befides, other particular friends of their own, whom 
 they widied to oblige, the number of the gucfts 
 were ftill increafed at every feaft. 
 
 By this means, Mifs Betfy and Mifs Flora fooii 
 acquired a very large acquaintance, and as through 
 the care of Mr. Francis they were lodged in one of 
 the heft and moft reputable houfes in town, their fami- 
 lies knov/n, and themfelves were young ladies who 
 knew how to behave as well as drefs, and receive 
 company in the moft elegant and polite manner, 
 every one was proud of a pretence for vifuing them. 
 
 D z The 
 

<#PG# 64>
54 ri^.- H I S T O R Y of 
 
 The refpecl paid to them would doubtlefs have 
 every day increafed, during the whole time they 
 ibould have thought proper to continue in Oxford, 
 and on quitting it have left behind them the highcft 
 idea of their merit, if, by on.- iitconfiderate adion, 
 they had not at once forfeited Uie cftcem they had 
 gained, and rendered themfclves the fubjcits of ri- 
 dicule, even to thofe who before had regarded them 
 with veneration. 
 
 l^hey were walking out one day, about an hour 
 or two before the time in which they ufually dined, 
 into the parks, where they were met by a gentle- 
 iiian-commoner, and a young ftudent, both of 
 whom the/ had been in company with at moft of 
 the entertainments before- mentioned. The fparks 
 begged leave to attend them, which being readily 
 granted, they walked all together for fome time 3 
 but the weather being very warm^ the gentleman- 
 commoner took an occafion to remind the ladies 
 how muc-h their beauty would" be in danger of fuf- 
 Icring from the immoderate rays of phoebus, and 
 propofcd going to fome gardens, full of the moft 
 beautiful alcoves and arbours, ^o (haded over, that 
 the fun, even in his meridian force, could, at the 
 moft, but glimmer through the delightful gloom : 
 he pain'ted the pleafures of the place, to which he 
 way defirous of leading them., with ^o romantic an 
 energy, that they immediately, and without the 
 leaft fcruple or hefuation^ confented to be conduct- 
 ed thither. 
 
 This was a condefcenfion, which he, who afk- 
 ed it, fcarce expedted would be granted, and, on 
 finding it To Qalily obtained, began to form fonie 
 coiijcclurcs no way to the advantage of thefe ladies 
 reputation. It is certain, indeed, that as he pro- 
 fefied a friendftiip for the brother, he ought not, m 
 ifridl: honour, to have propofed any thing to the 
 tii-ler, which would be imbecoming her to agr^e 
 
 "to , 
 

<#PG# 65>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. c,^ 
 io j but he was young, gay to an cxcefs, and in what 
 he faid, or did, not always took confideradon for 
 his guide. 
 
 They went on laughing till they came to the 
 place he mentioned, where the gentlemen having 
 ihewed their fair companions into the gardens, in 
 which were, indeed, feveral rcceflls, no lefs dark 
 tlian had been defcribed : on entering one ot them, 
 Mifs Bctfy cried, '•' Blefs me ! this is fit for nothing 
 *' but fur people to do wliat they are afliamcd of 
 " in the light." The fitter then, madam," replied 
 the gentleman- commoner, " to encourage a lover, 
 *' who, perhaps, has fufftred more tiirough his 
 *' own timidity, than the cruelty of the objcdl \^ 
 '* adores." He accompanied thefe words with ^ 
 fcizure of both her hands, and two or three kiffcs 
 on her lips. The young fiudcnt was no lefs free 
 witii Mifs Flora ; but neither of thefe ladies g<iv« 
 themfelves the trouble to refle^l what confequenccs 
 might poflibly attend a prelude of this nature, and 
 repulfcd the liberties they took in fuch a manner, 
 as made the offenders imagine they had not finned 
 beyond. a pardon. 
 
 They would not, however, be prevailed on to 
 ftay, or even to fit down in that darkfome rccefs, 
 but went back into a houfe, where they were (hewn 
 into a very pleafant room, which commanded thf 
 whole profpect of the garden, and was fuflicicntly 
 (haded from the fun by jefl'imin and honevfucklcs, 
 which grew a^ainft the windows : here wine, cakes, 
 jellies, and fuch like things being brought, the 
 converfation was extremely lively, and full of rral- 
 lantry, without the leaft mixture of indccenc. 
 
 The gentlemen exerted all their wit ana elo- 
 quence, to perfuadc the ladies not to go home in the 
 heat of the day ; but take up with fuch entertain- 
 ment as the place they were in was able to prefent 
 them with. Neither of them made any objection, 
 D 4 except 
 

<#PG# 66>
S6 The HISTORY of 
 
 except that having faid they fhould dine at home, 
 the fan ily would wait in expcdation of their com- 
 ing ; but this difficulty was cafily got over : the 
 footman, who had attended Mjfs Betfy and Mifs 
 Flora, in their" morning's walk, was in the houfe, 
 and might be fent to acquaint the people, that they 
 were not to expedl them. As they were neither 
 difpleafcd with the company, nor place they were 
 in, they needed not abundance of perfwafions, and 
 the fervant was immediately difpatched. The gen- 
 tlemen went out of the room, to give orders for 
 having fomething prepared, but ftaid not two mi- 
 jiutes ; and, on their return, omitted nothing that 
 might keep up the good humour and fprightlinefs 
 of their fair companions. 
 
 Perfons of fo gay and volatile a difpofition, as 
 thefe four, could not content thcmfelves with fit- 
 ting ftiil, and barely talking, every limb muft 
 
 be in motion," every faculty employed. Tl>e 
 
 ^geiitlcman commoner took Mifs Betfy 's hand, and 
 led her fome ftens of a minuette, then fell into 
 a rigadoon, then into the louvre, and fo ran through 
 all the fchool-dances, without regularly beginning 
 or ending any one of them, or of the tunes he 
 /ung : the young ftudent was not lefs alert with 
 Mifs Flora ; fo that between fmging, dancing and 
 laughing, they all grew extremely warm. Mifs 
 Betfy ran to a window to take breath, and get a 
 little air ; her partner followed, and taking up her 
 fan, which Jay on a table, employed it with a 
 great deal of dexterity, to affift the wind, that 
 came in at the cafement for her refrefhment. 
 *' Heaven !" cried he, " how divinely lovely do 
 *« you now appear ? the goddefs of the fpring, 
 *« nor Venus's felf, was ever painted half fo beau- 
 *« tiful. What eyes ! — what a mouth! — and what 
 •' a {hape I", continued he, furveying her, as it 
 were, from head to foot, " how exquifitely turn- 
 
 *« ed ! 
 

<#PG# 67>
ce 
 
 M//} Betsy Thoughtless. c^y 
 
 ed ! •*— - how taper ! how flender ! 1 
 
 *' don't believe you meafure half a yard roiird 
 '' the waift." In fpeaking thefe words, he put his 
 handkerchief about her waift, after which ho lied 
 it round his head, repeating thefe lines of Mr, 
 Waller's : 
 
 *' That which her flender waift confin'd • 
 " Shall now my joyful temples bind.; 
 *^ No monarch but would give his crown, 
 " His arms might do what this has done.'* 
 «« O fie upon it," faid Mifs Bctfy, laughing, 
 and fnatching it from his head, *' this poctrv is 
 " ftalc, I fhould rather have cxpeacd from an ( )xo- 
 " nian, fome fine thing of his own extempore, 
 " on this occrJion ; which, perhaps, 1 might hnve 
 " been vain enough to have got printed in the 
 *' monthly magazines." 
 
 " Ah ! madam," replied he, looking on her 
 with dying languifhments, " ^'•'^"'^''^ ^^^ ^^^^"^^ '^ 
 «^ deeply affedted, the brain feldom produces any 
 ** thing'but incongruous iders. Had Sacarifla bccii 
 *' miftrcfs of the charms you are, or had Waller 
 " loved like me, he iiad been hfs capable of writ- 
 " ing in the manner he did." 
 
 The ftudent perceiving his friend was entering 
 into a particular converfation with Mifs Bctfy, 
 found means to draw Mifs Flora out of the room, 
 and left them together, though tliis young lady af- 
 terwards protcftcd, (he called^to MifsBetfy to fol- 
 Jow ; but if (lie did, it was in fuch a low voice, 
 that the other did not hear her, and continued her 
 pleafantry, rallying the gentleman-commontr, or 
 every thing he laid, till l^e Rnding the opportunity 
 he had of being revenged, fgon turned his humble 
 adoration into an air more free and natural' to him. 
 As fne was opening her mouth to utter fome farc?fm 
 or other, he catched her in his arms, and began 
 to kifs her with fo much warmth and eagcrnefs 
 D 5 tlut 
 

<#PG# 68>
58 The HISTORY of 
 
 that furprized her ; fhe ftruggled to get loofe, an^ 
 calJed Mifs Flora, not knowing (he was gone, to 
 come to her afliftance. The efforts fhe made at 
 firfl: to oblige him to dcfift, were not, however, 
 quite fo ftrenuous as they ought to have beenjon fuch 
 en occafion ; but finding he was about to proceed 
 to greater liberties than any man before had ever 
 taken v/ith her, fhe colle£^ed all her ftrength, and 
 broke from him, when looking round the room, 
 and feeing no body there, " Blefs me," cried fhe, 
 *' what is the meaning of all this ? — where arc our 
 *"' friends?'' " They are gone," faid he, " to 
 pay the debt, which love, and youth, and beau- 
 ty challenge ; let us not be remifs, nor waOe 
 the precious moments in idle fcruples. Come, 
 my angel ! " purfued he, endeavouring to get 
 her once more into his arms, " make me the hap- 
 ** piefi of mankind, and be as divinely good as you 
 •' are fair." 
 
 ** 1 do not underfland you, Sir," replied fhe, 
 ** but neither defire, nor will (lay to hear an tx- 
 *' planation." She fpoke this with fomewhatof an 
 haughty air, and was making towards the door ; 
 but he was far from being intimidated, and, inftead 
 of futte ring her to pafs, he feized her a little rough- 
 ly with one hand, and with the other made faft tht2 
 door y '' Come, com.e, my dear creature," cried 
 he, " no more rcfiftance, you fee you are in my 
 *' power, and the very name of being fo, is fuf- 
 ** £cient to abfolve you to yourfelf, for any aft 
 " of kindnefs you may beftow upon me ; be ge- 
 ** nerous then, and be aflured it fhall be an invio- 
 '« labie iecret." 
 
 She was about to fay fomething, but he (lopped 
 her mouth with kifTes, and forced her to fit down 
 in a chair, v/herc holding her faft, her ruin had 
 eeitsinly been compleated, if a loud knocking at 
 
 the 
 

<#PG# 69>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 59 
 
 the door had not prevented him from profecuting his 
 defign. 
 
 Jl'his was the brother of Mifs Betfy, who having 
 been at her lodgings, on his coming from thence 
 met the footman, who had been fcnt to acquaint 
 the family the ladies would not dine at home : he 
 afked where his filler was, and the fellow having 
 told him, came directly to the place. A waiter 
 of the houfc (hewed him to the room; on finding 
 it locked, he was ftrangcly amazed, and both 
 knocked and called to have i: opened, with a good 
 deal of vehemence. 
 
 The gentleman-commoner knowing his voice, 
 was (hocked to the lati degree ; but quitted, that in- 
 ilant his intended prcv, and Itt him enter. Mr. 
 Francis, on coming in, knew not what to think ; 
 he faw the gentleman in great difoider, and liis 
 filler in much more. ** What is the meaning of 
 ** this,." fuid he : '* Sifter, how came you lure r" 
 *' AfK me no queflions at prcl'wnt," replied llic, 
 fcarce able to fpeak, io ftrangcly liac her late fright 
 feized on her fpirits, ** but ice mc fafe from this 
 " curfed houfe, and that worff of men." Her 
 fpeaking in this manner, made Mr. Francis appre- 
 hend the whole, and pe rhapb more than the truth. 
 " How, Sir 1 " faid he, dartuig a furious look on 
 the gentleman-commoner, *' witat is it 1 hear.? 
 
 " have you dared to .?" " Whatever I 
 
 ** have dared to," interrupted the other, I am c.i- 
 '' pable of defending." *' 'Tis well," rejoined the 
 •' brother of Mifs Betfy, perhaps, I may put you 
 ** to the trial ; but this, is not a time or place." 
 He then took hold of his filler's hand, and led her 
 down ftairs ; as they were going out, Mifs Betly 
 (lopping a little to adjuft her drefs, which was 
 flrangely difordered, (lie bethought herfelf of Mils 
 Flora, who, though (he was very angry with, flie 
 did not chuofe to leave behiiid at the mercy of fuch 
 
 rakes, 
 

<#PG# 70>
6o <rbe HIST ORY cf 
 
 rakes, as (he had reafon to think thofe were, whom 
 (he had been in company with. Juft as (he was 
 defiring her brother to fend a waiter in fearch of that 
 young lady, they faw her coming out of the gar- 
 den, Jed by the young ftudent, who, as foon as he 
 beheld Mr. Francis, cried, " ha ! Frank, how 
 *' came you here ? you look out of humour.'* 
 *' How I came here, it matters not," replied he, 
 fullenly; " and as to my being out of humour, 
 *' perhaps you may know better than I yet do, 
 *' what caufe I have for being fo." 
 
 He waited for no anfwer to thefe words, but con- 
 duKSled his fifter out of the houfe as haftily as he 
 could : Mifs Flora followed, after having taken leave 
 of her companionin what manner fhe thought pro- 
 per. 
 
 On their coming home, Mifs Betfy related to 
 her brother, as far as her modcfty would permit, 
 all the particulars of this adventure, and ended with 
 laying, that fure it was heaven alone that gave her 
 flreiigth to prevent the perpetration of the villain's 
 intentions. Mr. Francis, all the time fhe was 
 ■fpeaklng, bit his lips, and (hewed great tokens of 
 an extraordinary diilurbance in his mind ; but offer- 
 ed not the leafl interruption. When he perceived 
 (lie had done, '' well, fifter," faid he, " I (hall 
 *' hear what he has to hy, and will endeavour to 
 *' oblige him to afk your pardon i" and foon after 
 took his leave. 
 
 Mifs Betfy did not very Well comprehend his 
 meaning in thefc words, and was, indeed, dill in 
 too much confufion to confider on any thing: but 
 what the confequences were of this tranfa6lion the 
 reader will prefcntly be informed of. 
 
 CHAP- 
 

<#PG# 71>
A///} Betsy Thoughtless. 6s 
 
 CHAP. IX. 
 
 Contains fuch things as might be rcajonahly expe^cd^ 
 after the preceding adventures, 
 
 WHEN, in any thing irregular, and liable 
 to ccnfure, more perfons than one are 
 concerned, how natural is it for each to accufc 
 the other ? and it of ten happens, in this cafe, that 
 the greatcft part of the blame falls on the Icaft cul- 
 pable. 
 
 After Mr. Francis had left the ladies, in order to 
 be more fully convinced in this matter, and take 
 fuch meafarcs as he thought would bed become him 
 for the reparation of the affront offered to the ho- 
 nour of his family, Mifs Flora began to reproach 
 Mifs Betfy, for having related any thing of what 
 had pafTed to her brother : ** By your own at- 
 '* count," fiiid fhe, '* no harm was done to you; 
 *' but fome people love to make a bufile about no- 
 *' thing." " And fome people," replied Alifs 
 Betfy, tartly, *' love nothing but the gratifications 
 *' of their own palTiohs, and having no fenfe of 
 *' virtue or modefty themfelves, can have no.re- 
 *' gard to that of another." '' VVhr.t do you 
 " mean^Mifs?" cried the other, with a pert air. 
 *' My meaning is pretty plain,'* rejoined Mifs 
 Betfy i " but fmce you afFc6l fo much ignorance, ; 
 " I mufl: tell you, that the expedations of a fe- 
 ** cond edition of the fame work Mr. Gayland had 
 *' helped you to compofe, though from another 
 *' quarter, tempted you to fneak out of the room, 
 *' and leave your friend in danger of falling a facri- 
 *' fice to what her foul mofl: deteffs and fcorns." 
 Thefe words {i;ung Mifs Flora to the quick ; her 
 face was in an inifant covered with a fcarlct blufh, 
 and every feature betrayed the confufion of her 
 
 i*.ind 3 
 

<#PG# 72>
62 7^7^ H I S T O R Y ^/ 
 
 mind ; but recovering herfelf from it, much fooner 
 than mofl othprs of her age could have done : 
 •' Good lack/' cried (he, " I fancy you are fet- 
 *' ting up for a prude ; but pray, how came Mr. 
 " Gayland into your head ?— — .What, becaufe I 
 " told you he innocently romped with me one day 
 *' in the chamber, are you fo cenforious as to in- 
 *' fer any thing criminal pafied between us ? " 
 *' Whatever I infer," replied Mifs Betfy, difdain- 
 fully, " I have better vouchers for the truth of, 
 " than your report, and would advife you, when 
 " you go home, to get the chink in the pannel of 
 *^ the wainfcot of my lady's drefling room ftop- 
 •' ped up, or your next rendezvous with that gen- 
 '* tleman, may poflibly have witneiTes of more ill- 
 *' nature than myfelf." " That can fcarcely be," 
 faid iVlifs Flora, ready to burft with vexation ; 
 *' but don't think I value your little malice^ you 
 ** are only angry becaufe he flighted the advances 
 *' you made him, and took all opportunities to 
 *' fhew how much his heart and judgment gave the 
 " the preference to me." Thefe words fo piqu- 
 ed the vanity of Mifs Betfy, that not able to 
 bear fije (hould continue in the imagination of 
 being better liked than herfelf, though even by the 
 man fhc hated, told her the foUicitations he had 
 made to her, the letter fhe had received from him, 
 and the rebuff fhe had given him upon it ; " fo 
 that," purfued (]ie, ** it was not till after he found 
 *' there was no hopes of gaining me, that he carri- 
 '^ ed his devoirs to you." 
 
 Mifs Flora w^is more nettled at this eclaircifc- 
 ment, than flie v/as at the difcovery {he now per- 
 ceived the other had made of her intrigue : fhe 
 pretended, however, not to believe a word of what 
 fhe had faid : but willing to evade all farther dif- 
 courfe on that head, returned to the adventure they 
 bad juil gone through with the Oxonians. " Ne- 
 
 '** ver 
 

<#PG# 73>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 6j 
 
 *' ver exped^j" faid fhe, '* to pafs it upon any one 
 *' of common fenfe, that if you bad not a mind to 
 *' have been alone with that terrible man, as you 
 ** now defcribe him, you would have flaid in th« 
 *' room after I was gone, and called to you to fol- 
 *' low." 
 
 It was in vain that Mifs Betfy denied (he cither 
 heard her fpeak, or knew any thing of her depar- 
 ture, till Tome time after fhe was gone, and ih« 
 gentleman- commoner began to ufe her with rucfi 
 familiarities as convinced her he was fenilble no 
 witnefles were prefcnt. This, though no more 
 than truth, was of no confcqiicncc to her juftificati- 
 on, to one determined to believe the worll, or, at 
 leaft, feem to do (o : Mifs Flora treated with con- 
 tempt all fhe faid on this fcore, derided her impreca- 
 tions, and to mortify her the more, faid to her, i^i 
 a taunting manner : " Come, come, Mifs Betfv, 
 " 'tis a folly to think to impofc upon the world by 
 
 " fuch fhallow artifices : what your inclinati- 
 
 *' ons are is evident enough ; anj' one may fee, that 
 '' if it had not been for your brother's unfeafonable 
 " interruption, no-body would ever have lieard a 
 " word of thofc infuhs you now fo heavily com- 
 " plain of." 
 
 Poor Mifs Betfy could not refrain lettitig fall forr>e 
 tears at fo unjuft and cruel an innuendo ; but the 
 greatnefs of her fpirit enabled her in a few moments 
 to overcome the fhock it had given her : fhe re- 
 turned reproaches with reproaches, and as fhe had 
 infinitely more of truth and reafon on her fide, had 
 alfo much the better in this combat of tongucF, nc- 
 verthelcfs the other would not give out ; (he up- 
 braided, and exaggerated, with the moft malicious 
 comments on it, every little indifcretjon Mrfs 
 Betfy had been guilty of, repeated every cenfure 
 •which fhe had heard the ill-natured part of the 
 
 world 
 

<#PG# 74>
64 "The HISTORY cf 
 
 world pafs upon her condud]-, and added many 
 more, the invention of her own fertile brain. 
 
 Some ladies they had made acquaintance with in 
 town coming to vifit them, put an end to the de- 
 bate ; but neither being able prefcntly to forget the 
 bitter rcilcdions cad on her by the other, both re- 
 mained extremely fullen the whole night, and their 
 mutual ill humour might poflibly have lafted much 
 longer, but for an accfdent more material, which 
 took off their attention, as it might have produced 
 much worfc confequences than any quarrel between 
 then^ifelvcs could be attended with. It happened in 
 this manner : 
 
 The brother of Mifs Betfy was of a fiery difpo- 
 fition, and though thofe who were entrufted with 
 the care of his education, were not w^anting in 
 their pains to correct this propcnfity, which they 
 thought would be the more unbecoming in him, 
 2.S he was intended for the pulpit, yet did not theh: 
 endeavours for that purpofe meet with all the fuc- 
 cefs they wiflied. Nature may be moderated, but 
 never can be wholly changed, the feeds of wrath 
 flill remained in his foul, nor could the rudiments 
 that had been given him be fufiiclent to hinder 
 them from fpringing into adion, when urged by 
 any provocation. The treatment his fifler had re- 
 ceived from the gentleman- commoner, feemed to 
 him fo juftifiable a one, that he thought he ought 
 not, without great fubmiffions on the part of the 
 tranfgreflcjr, be prevailed upon to put it up. 
 
 The firfl ftep he took was to found the. young 
 fludent, as to what he knew relating to the affair, 
 who freely told him, as Mifs Betfy heifclf had done, 
 where they met the ladies, and the manner- in 
 which fiiey went into the houfe ; protefling, that 
 neither himfcif, nor according to the beft of his be- 
 lief, the gentleman-commoner, had at that time 
 
 any 
 

<#PG# 75>
Af//} Betsy Thoughtless. 6^ 
 
 any defigns in view, but meer complaifance and 
 gallantry. 
 
 " How then came you to feparate yourfelvcs ?" 
 cried Mr. Francis, with fome earneftnefs. " That 
 " alfo was accidental," replied the other : " your 
 " filler's companion telling me, {he liked the gar- 
 *' den better than tlie room we were in, I thought 
 " I could do no lefs than attend her thither. I 
 *' cenfcls I did not confult whether thofe we 
 " left behind had any inclination to fellow us or 
 *' not." 
 
 The air with which he fpoke of this part of the 
 adventure, had fomething in it, which did not give 
 Mr. Francis the moft favourable idea of ivJifs 
 Flora's conduct j but that not much concerning 
 him, and finding nothing wherewith he could jiiWy 
 reproach the ftudent, he foon after quitted him, 
 and went to the gentleman- commoner, having been 
 told he might find him in his rooms* 
 
 Had any one been witncfs of the manner in 
 which thefe two accofted each other, they would 
 not have been at a lofs to guefs what would en- 
 fue : the brother of Mifs Betfy came with a mind 
 full of rcfentment, and determined to repair the 
 affront had been offered to him in the perfon of 
 a filler, who was very dear to him, by calling the 
 other to a fevere account for what he had done. 
 The gentleman- commoner was defcended of a no- 
 ble family, had an eftate to fupport the dignity of 
 his birth, and was too much puffed up and info- 
 lent on the fmiles of fortune :^ie was confcious 
 the affront he had given demanded fatisfadtion, and 
 neither doubted of the errand on which Mr. 
 Francis was come, nor wondered at it ; but could 
 not bring himfelf to acknowledge he had done a- 
 . mifs, nor think of making any excufe for his be- 
 haviour. Guilt in a proud heart is generally 
 
 acGompanied 
 

<#PG# 76>
66 The HISTORY of 
 
 accompanied with a fullen obftinacy; for, as the 
 poet fays, 
 
 " Forgivencfs to the injur'd does belong : 
 
 " But they ne'er pardon who have done the 
 " wrong." 
 
 He, therefore, received the interrogatories Mr. 
 Francis was beginning to make, with an air rather 
 indignant than complying, which the other not be- 
 ing able to brook, fach hot words arofe between 
 tliein, as could not but occafion a challenge, which 
 was given by Mr. Francis. The appointmer>t 
 to meet was the next morning at fix o'clock, 
 and the place, thi't very field in which the gentle- 
 man commoner, and his friend had ^o unluckily 
 happened to meet the ladies in their morning's 
 Wuik. 
 
 Neither of them wanted courage, nor commu- 
 nicated tiieir rendezvous to any one pejTun, in 
 hope of being difappointed without danger of their 
 honour ; but each being equally animated with the 
 ambition of humbling the arrogance of the other, 
 both were fccret as to the bufiiiefs, and no lefs punc- 
 tual as to the time. 
 
 The agreement between them was fword and 
 piftol, v/hich both having provided themfelves with, 
 they no fooner came within a proper dlflance, than 
 they diicharged at each cth.er, the firft courfe of 
 this fatal entertainment; that of the gentleman - 
 commoner was (o well aimed, that one of the bul- 
 lets lodged in the fiioulder, and the other graz- 
 ing on the fliftiy part of the arm of his antagonifl", 
 put (lim into a great deal of pain ; but thefe wounds 
 rather increafed than diminiOied the fury he was 
 poffjlled of; he inftantly drew his fword, and ran 
 at thz other with fo well-direcSlcd a force, that his 
 weapon entered three inches deep into the right fide 
 of the genticman-commoner : both of them receiv- 
 ed fcvcral other hurts, yet ftill both continued the 
 
 %ht 
 

<#PG# 77>
Mffs Betsy Thoughtless. 6y 
 
 fight with equal vehemence, nor would either of 
 them, in all probability, have receded, till one or 
 other of them had lain dead upon the place, if feme 
 countrymen, who by accident were palTing that 
 way, had not with their clubs beat down the 
 fwords of both, and carried the owners of them by 
 meer force in:o the village tjiey were going to, 
 where they were no fooner entered, than Itveral 
 people who knew them, feeing them p^fs by in this 
 manner, covered all over with their ov/n blood, and 
 guaided by a pack of ruftics, ran out ta cnqi:ire 
 wliat had happened, which being informed of, they 
 took them out of the hands of thefe men, and pro- 
 vided proper apartmentb for them. 
 
 By this time they v/ere both extremely faint 
 through theangu'lh of their wounds, and the great 
 .cfFufion of blood that had ifllicd from them. Sur- 
 geons were immediately fent for, who on examii> 
 ing their hurts, pronounced none of them to be 
 mortal, yet fudi as would require fome time for 
 cure. 
 
 Mr. Francis fufFered extreme torture in having 
 the bullet extradled from his (houlder, yet notwith- 
 flanding that, and the weak condition he was in, 
 he made a fervant fupoort him in his bed, w^hile 
 he fcrawled out thcfc few lines to his fiH:er ; whrch, 
 as foon as finiflied, were carried to her by the fame 
 pcrfon. 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 *< My dear fijler^ 
 ** J H A V E endangered my life, and am now 
 " JL confined to my bed, by the v/ounds I hive 
 *' received, in endeavouring to revenge your quar- 
 " rel : do not think I tell you this by way of re- 
 .'* proach j for, I aflure you, would the circum- 
 ** ftance of the affair have permitted it to have 
 
 been 
 

<#PG# 78>
68 The HISTORY of 
 
 *« been concealed, you never fhould have known 
 " it. 
 
 " I {liould be glad to fee you, but think it not 
 " proper chat you (hould cornc to me, 'till I hear 
 *' what is faid concerning this matter. I fhall fend 
 " to you every day ; and that you will be perfedtJy 
 '* eafy, is the earned requeft of, 
 '' Dear Betfy, 
 '' Your mofl afFe6lionatc brother, 
 " And humble fervant, 
 " F. Thoughtless." 
 
 The young ladies were that morning at breakfaft 
 in the parlour, with tlie gentlewoman of the houfe, 
 when the maid came running in, and told her mi- 
 ftrer3,{hc had heard, in a (hop where flie had been, of 
 a fad accident that had juft happened : " Two gen- 
 " tlemen," cried fhe, " of the univerfity have 
 *' been fighting, and almoft killed one another ; 
 *' and they fay," .continued fhe, " it was about a 
 *' young lady, that one of them attempted to 
 '' ravifh." 
 
 Mifs Betfy and Mifs Flora, at this intelligence, 
 looked at each other with a good deal of confufion, 
 already beginning to fufpe6"l: v/ho the pcrfons were, 
 and how deeply themfclves, one of them efpecially, 
 was interefted in this misfortune. The gentlewo- 
 man afked her fervant. if fiie knew the names of 
 thofe who fought: ^' No, Madam," anfwered flie, 
 " I could not learn that, as yet j but the people in 
 *^ the Iheet arc all talking of it, and I do not doubt 
 " but I fhall hear the whole flory the next time I 
 *' go out." 
 
 The good gentlewoman, little imagining how 
 much her gu efts were concerned in what Ihe fpake, 
 could not now forbear lamenting the ungovernable- 
 nefs of youth ; the heedlefs levities of the one fex, 
 and the mad-brained paffions of the other. The 
 
 perfoiis 
 

<#PG# 79>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 69 
 pcrfons to whom flie direfled this difcourfe would 
 not, at another time, have given much ear to i^, 
 or perhaps have replied to. it with raillery ^ but the 
 occafion of it now put both of ihem in too lerious 
 a temper to ofier any interruption, and fhe w^as 
 flill going on, inveighing againft the follies and vices 
 of the age, v/hen Mifs lietfy received the above 
 letter from her brother, which confirmed ali th.ofe 
 alarming conjedures the maid's report had raifed in 
 her mind. 
 
 The miftrefs of the houfe perceiving the young 
 man, who brought the letter, came upon bufmefs 
 to the ladies, had the good manners to leave the 
 room, that they might talk with the greater free- 
 dom. Mifs Betfy afked a thoufand queftion?, but 
 he was able to inform her of no farther particulars, 
 than what the letter contained. 
 
 The moment he was gone, (he ran up to her 
 chamber^ threw herfelf upon the bed, and, in a 
 flood of tears, gave a loofe to the mod poignant 
 vexation fhe had ever yet experienced. Mifs Flora 
 fallowed, and feeing her in this condition, thoucyht 
 fhe could do no Icfs in decency, than contribute 
 every thing in her power for her confolation. 
 
 By the behaviour of this young lady, in other 
 rcfpe'fls, however, the reader will eafily perceive 
 it was more through policy than real good-nature, 
 flic treated her afflicted companion with the ttinder- 
 ncfs fne now did ; (lie knew, that it was not by 
 an open quarrel with Mifs Betfy fhe could wreak 
 any part of the fpite fhe had conceived againft: her, 
 and was therefore glad to lay hold of this opportu- 
 r.ity of being reconciled. 
 
 *' I v/as afraid, my dear," Lid {lie, '^ that it 
 " would come to this, and that put me into fo 
 " great a pafiion with you yeft-erday, for telling 
 " Mr. Francis any thing of the matter : the men 
 " are fuch creatures, that there is no truftlng them 
 
 " with 
 

<#PG# 80>
70 The HIST OR Y of 
 
 *' with any thing ; but come,'' continued flie, 
 kifling her cheek, " don't grieve and torment your- 
 •* felt in this manner, you find there is no danger of 
 " death on either fide, and as for the reft it will aH 
 " blow off in time." Mifs Betfy faid little to this, 
 the fudden paflion of her foul muft have its vent ; 
 but when that was over, fhe began to liften to the 
 voice of comfort, and, by degrees, to refume her 
 natural vivacity, not forefeeing that this unhappy 
 adventure would lay her under mortifications, which 
 to a perfon of her fpirit were very diincult to be 
 borne. 
 
 CHAP. X. 
 
 Gives the c^tajlrophe of the Oxford ramble^ and 
 in 'Ouhat manner the young ladies returned to 
 London, 
 
 IF the wounds Mr. Francis had received had 
 been all the misfortune attending Mifs Betfy in 
 this adventure, it is probable, that as (he every day 
 heard he v/as in a fair way of recovering, the firil 
 guft of paiTion would have been all fhe had fuftain- 
 ed ; but fhe foon found other confequences arifing 
 from it, which were no lefs afSiiling, and more 
 galling to her pride. 
 
 The quarrel between the two young gentlemen, 
 and the occafion of it, was prefently blazed over 
 the whole town ; it fpread like wild- fire, every 
 one made their feveral comments upon it, and few 
 there were who endeavoured to find any excufcs 
 for theihdre iVlifs Betfy and Mifs Flora had in it. 
 
 The ladies of Oxford are commonly more than 
 ordinarily circumfpecf in their behaviour, as indeed 
 it behoves them to be, in a place where there are 
 fuch a number of young gentlemen, many of whom ' 
 
 purfue 
 

<#PG# 81>
I 
 
 MtfsBzTSY Tkouchtliss. 71 
 
 purfue plcafure more than ftudy, and fcruple no- 
 thing for the gratification of their defires. It is not, 
 therefore, to be wondered at, that being from their 
 infancy trained up in the mod ftri(5l referve, and 
 accuftomed to be upon their guard, againft even 
 the moft diftant approaches of the other fex, they 
 fhould be apt to pafs the fevcreft cenfurcs on a con- 
 du(ft, which they had been always taught to look " 
 upon as the fure deftru61ion of reputation, and fre- 
 quently fatal to innocence and virtue. 
 
 This being pretty generally the charatSleriflic of 
 thofe ladies, v/ho were of any difl:in<5iion, in Oxford, 
 MifsBetfy and Mifs Flora immediately found, that 
 while they continued there, they muft either be 
 content to fit at home alone, or convcrfe only 
 with fuch as were as difagreeable to them, as they 
 had now rendered themfelves to thofe of a more un- 
 blcmifhed fame. 
 
 They had received feveral vifits, all of which 
 they not yet had time or leifure to return j but now 
 going to pay the debt, which complaifance de- 
 manded from them, they were denied acccfs at e* • 
 very place they went to : all the perfons were ei- 
 ther abroad or indifpoftd ; but the manner in which 
 thcfeanfvvcrs were given, eafily convinced Mifs 
 Betfy and M'fs Flora, that they were no more 
 than meer pretences to avoid feeing them. In the 
 public walks, and, in pafling through the ftreets, 
 they faw themfelves fliunned even to a degree of 
 rudenefs : thofe of their acquaintance, who Vv'cre 
 obliged to meet them, looked another way, and 
 went haflily en without vouchfafing a falute. 
 
 This was the treatment their late unhappy ad- 
 venture drew on them, from thofe of their ovvn fex, 
 nor did thofe of the other fccm to behave to them 
 with greater tendernefs or refpe£t, cfpeciully the 
 younger ftudents, who all ha\ing got the flor}^, . 
 thought they had a 1-ine opportunity of cxerci- 
 

<#PG# 82>
72 The HISTORY of 
 
 fing their poetic talent ; fatrrc and lampoons 
 flew about like hail : many of thefe anonymous 
 compofitions were directed to Mifs Betfy, and 
 tlirown over the rails into the area of the houfc 
 ■where flie lodged ; others w^ere fung under her win- 
 dows by perfons in difguife, and copies of them 
 handed about through the whole town, to the great 
 propagation of fcandal, and the fneering faculty, 
 
 ■ Never, certainly, did pride and vanity meet with 
 a' more fevere humiliation, than what thefe witi- 
 cifms inPiiifled on thofe, who by their inconfiderate 
 behaviour had laid themfelves open to them. Nei- 
 ther the alTurance of Mifs Flora, nor the great fpi- 
 rit of Mifs Betfy, could enable them to ftand the 
 fhock of thofe continual affronts, which every day 
 pVefented them with. They dreaded to expofe 
 themfelves to frefh infults, if they flirred out of the 
 doors, and at home they were perfecuted with the 
 unv/earicd remonftrances of their grave landlady, 
 fo that their condition was truly pitiable. 
 
 Both of them were equally impatient to get out 
 of a place where they found their company was held 
 in fo little cflimation ; but Mifs Betfy thought her 
 brother would not take it Well, fhould ihe go to 
 London, and leave him in the condition he then 
 was. Mifs Flora's importunities, however, joined 
 to the new occafions fhe every day had for incrca- 
 fmg her difcontent on Itaying, got the better of her 
 apprehenfions, and fhe v/rote to her brother in the 
 following terms : 
 
 To Mr. Francis Thoughtless^ 
 
 *' D ear hr other y 
 cc r-|-^ HOUGH I am not to my great afflic- 
 " JL tion permitted to fee you, or ofFer that 
 *' affiftance might be expc6tcd from a fificr in 
 ♦• your prcfcnt fituation ; yet I caijnot, without 
 
 '^ the 
 

<#PG# 83>
A///} Betsy Thought LE.'^^s. 73 
 
 ** the extremeft regret, refolvc to quit Oxford, be- 
 *' fore you are perfe6tly recovered of thofc hurts 
 you have received upon my account. However, 
 ashy your judging it improper for mc to come 
 
 *' to you, I cannot fuppofe you arc wholly unac- 
 " quainted with the fevere ufage la^ely given me, 
 " and muft look on every affront offered to mc as 
 " an indignity to you, I am apt to flatter myfelf 
 *' you will not be offended, that I v/i(h to remove 
 " from a place, where innocence is no defence a- 
 " gainft fcandal, and thefhew of virtue moro ccn- 
 *' fidered than the reality. 
 
 " Neverthelefs, I (ball determine nothing, till 
 '' I hear your fentiments, wjiich, if I find con- 
 •' formable to mine, (ball fct out for London 
 *' with all poffiblc expedition. I would very fain 
 *' fee you before 1 go, and, if you confent, vviil 
 *' come to you fo muffled up, as not to be 
 *' known, by any who may happen to meet me. 
 '' I (hall expert your anfwer with the utmoil im- 
 " patience, being, 
 
 '^ My dear brother, 
 "By friendfhip as well as blood, 
 
 " Moft affectionately yours, 
 
 *' E. Thoughtless.^* 
 
 When this letter was difpatched, Mifs Flora made 
 ufe of all the arguments fhe was Miftrefs of, in or- 
 der to perfuade Mifs Beify to go for London, even 
 in cafe her brother (hould not be altogether fo wil- 
 ling for it, as (he wiflied he would. Mifs Betfy, 
 though no lefs eager than herfelf to be out of a place 
 fhe nowfo much detefted, would not be prevailed 
 upon to promife any thing on this fcore ; but per- 
 fifted in her refolution of being wholly directed how 
 to proceed, by the anfwer (lie fliould receive from 
 Mr. Francis. 
 ' Vol. I. E Mifs 
 

<#PG# 84>
74 ne HIST ORY of- 
 
 Mifs Flora was fo fretted at this perverienefs', as 
 flic called it, that (he told her, in a very great pet, 
 that flic might flay if flie plcafcd, and be the laugh* 
 ing-ftock of the town ; but, for her own part, ihe 
 had more fpirit, and would be gone the next day* 
 Mifs Betfy cooly replied, that if fhe thought pro- 
 per to do fo, fhe was doubtlcfs at liberty ; but be- 
 lieved Mr. Goodman, and even lady Mellafm her- 
 felf, would look on fuch abehavionr, as neither con- 
 fident with generofity, or common good manners. 
 It is indeed fcarce probable, that the other had 
 the Icafl: intention to do as fhe had faid, though fhe 
 fiill continued to threaten it, in the mofl pofitive 
 and peremptory terms ; and this, if we confider 
 the temper of both thefe young ladies, we may 
 reafonably fuppofe, might have occafioncd a fecond 
 quarrel bctv/een them, if the fcrvant, whom Mr. 
 Francis always fent to his filler, had not that in- 
 flant come in, and put an end to the difpute, by de- 
 livering a letter to Mifs Betfy, which fhe haflily 
 €>pening, found it contained thefe lines : 
 
 To Mifs Thoughtless. 
 
 •" My dear fijler^ 
 
 *' Y T is with an inexprefTible fatisfa(flion that I 
 
 *' Jl find your own inclinations have anticipated 
 
 *' the requeft I was jufl about to make you. I do 
 
 *' afTure you, the moment I received your letter, I 
 
 " was goi{)g to v/rite, in order to perfuade you to 
 
 '' do the very thing you fcem lo defire. Oxford 
 
 *' is indeed a very cenforious place ; I have al- 
 
 *' ways obferved it to be fo, and have frequently 
 
 " told the ladies, between jeil and earnefl:, that I 
 
 " thought it Vv^as a town of the moft fcandal, and 
 
 " leaft fm, of any in the world. I am pretty con- 
 
 *« fident fome of ihofe, who pretend to give them- 
 
 - " felves aiis concerning you aad Mifs Flora, arc as 
 
 ** perfedlly 
 

<#PG# 85>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 75 
 
 '' perfectly convinced of your innocence as I mv- 
 " felf am ; yet after all that has happened, I vvoulj 
 " not have you think of flaying 5 and the fooner 
 " you depart the better : you need be under no 
 *' apprelienfions on account of my wounds i thof: 
 " 1 received from the fword of my antagonirt arc 
 '* in a manner healed, and that with the pidcl {]:ior, 
 " in my fi:ioul 'cr, is in as fine a way as can be ex- 
 ** peeled, in fo ihort a time. Tbofe I had th« 
 " fortune to give him, are in yet a better condition ; 
 " fo that I believe, if it was not for the over cau- 
 '* tion of our furgeon, we might both quit our 
 *' rooms to-morrow. I hear that our grave fup^- 
 '' riors have had fonie confultations on our due), 
 '* and that there is a talk of our being both expcl- 
 *' led 5 but, for my part,I (liall certainly fave ilicni 
 " the trouble, and quit the univcrfity of my own 
 '* accord, as foon as my recovery is complcatcd : 
 " my genius is b/ no means adapted to the iludv 
 *' of divinity'; I think the care of my own foid 
 " more than fufficient for me, withoat taking up* 
 " on me the charge of a whole pariili : you may, 
 " therefore, exptct to fee me fliortly at London, 
 "as it is highly neceflary I fhould confult Mr. 
 " Goodman concerning my future fettlcment in 
 *' the woild. I ftiould be extremely glad of a vifit 
 *' from you before you leave Oxford, more efpe- 
 " cially as f have fomething of moment to fay to 
 " you, which I do not choofe to communicate by 
 " letter i but cannot think it at all proper, for 
 '* particular reafons, that you (hould come to me, 
 " fomeor other of the gentlemen being perpetually 
 '^ dropping into my chamber ; and it is impofliblc 
 " for you to difguife yourfelf fo as not to be dl- 
 *' ftinguifhed by young fellows, whofe curicjjity 
 " would be the more excited, by your endeavours 
 •' to conceal yourfelf. As this might revive the 
 '*' difcourfe of an affair, which I could wifli mi^ht 
 E 2 *''b« 
 

<#PG# 86>
76 rbe HISTORY of 
 
 " be buried in an eternal oblivion, muft defire you 
 " will defer the fatisfacSlion you propofe to give 
 ^' me, till we meet at London, to which 1 wifh 
 '^ you, and your fair companion, a fafe and piea- 
 " fant journey. lam, 
 
 *' With the greateft tendernefs, 
 
 " My dear fiftcr, 
 *' Your affectionate brother, 
 
 " F. Thoughtless.** 
 
 The receipt of this letter gave an infinity of con- 
 tentment to Mifs Betfy ; Ihe had made the offer 
 of going to take her leave of him, chiefly with the 
 view of keeping him from fufpediing (he wanted 
 natural affection, and was no iefs pleafed with his 
 rcfufing the requeft: fhe made him on that account, 
 than fhe was with his fo readily agreeing to her re- 
 turning to London. Mifs Flora was equally de- 
 lighted J tliey ftnt their footman that inftant to 
 take places \n the flage-coach, and early the next 
 morning fet out from a place, which, on their en- 
 tering into. it, they did not imagine they (liould 
 quit, either fo foon, or with fo little regret. 
 
 CHAP. XL 
 
 Lays a foundation for many events to he produced 
 b^ ilme^ and waited for with patience, 
 
 J S S Betfy, and Mifs Flora, on their com- 
 ing home, were in fome perplexity how to 
 relate the (lory of their Oxford adventure to lady 
 Mcllafin and Mr. Goodman i and it is very likely 
 they would have thought proper to have kept it a 
 fecret, if the unlucky duel between Mr. Francis, 
 and the gentleman-commoner, which they were 
 
 fenfiblc 
 

<#PG# 87>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. yy 
 
 cnfible would be a known thing, had not rendered 
 the concealment of the whole utterly impra6iicable. 
 
 As there was no remedy, Mifs Flora took upon 
 her to lay open the matter to her Mamma ; which 
 {he did with lo muc1i artifice, that if that lady had 
 been as r.ufterc, as fhc was really the reveife, fhe 
 could nor. have found much to condemn, either in 
 tha conduct of her daughter, or Mifs Betfy : as to 
 A4r. Goodman, he left the whole management of 
 the young ladies, in thcfe particulars, entirely to 
 liis wife, io faid little to theifi en their fhare of the 
 adventure ; but was extremely concerned for the 
 part Mr. Francis had in it, as he fuppofed it was 
 chiefly owing to that unlucky incident, that he had 
 taken a refolution to leave the college ; and he very 
 well knev/, that a certain nobleman, who was a 
 diftant relation of his family, and godfather to Mr. 
 Francis, had always promifed to beftov/ a large be- 
 nefice, in his gift, upon him, ac- foon as he fhould 
 have com pleated his fhidics. . 
 
 Tills honefl: guardian thought he fliould be v/ant- 
 ing in the duty of the truft rcpofc'l in him, to fufl-er 
 his charge to throw away that fine profpcc^ in his 
 view, if by any means he could prevent him fron;! 
 taking fo rafli and inconfidcrate a flep : and as to 
 his being expelled, he doubted not, but, between 
 him and Sir Ralph, intercfi- might be made to the 
 heads of the univerfuy, to get the affair of the 
 duel pafTed over. The grcateft difficulty he had to 
 apprehend, in compaffing this point, was from 
 the young gentleman himfelf, who he had oh- 
 ferved was of a temper fomewhat obflinatc, and 
 tenacious of his own opinion : refolving, however, 
 i6 try all means poflible, he wrote immediately to 
 him, reprefenting to him, in the ffrongeft and mofl 
 pathetic terms he was maftcr of, the vaft advanta- 
 ges the clergy enjoyed, the refpecb they had from 
 all degrees of people, and endeavoured to convince 
 E 3 ' him. 
 

<#PG# 88>
7S The HISTORY of 
 
 him, that there was no avocation whatever, by 
 which a younger brother might fo eafily advance 
 hiis fortune, and do honour to his family. 
 
 He alfo fent a letter to Sir Ralph Trufly, ac- 
 quainting him with the whole ftory, and earneftly 
 lequefiing, that he would write to Mr. Francis, 
 and omit nothing that might engage him to defift 
 from doing a thing fo contrary to his intereft, and 
 the intentions of his deceafed father, as what he 
 rov/ had thoughts of doing was manifeftly fo. Thefe 
 efforts, by both the guardians were often repeated ; 
 but without the lealt fuccefs : the young gentle- 
 man found arguments to oppofe againft theirs, 
 which neither of them could deny to h.ave weight, 
 particularly that of his having no call to take upon 
 iiim holy orders. During thefe debates, in which 
 Mifs Betfy gave herftlf no manner of -concern, fhe 
 received a letter from her brother, containing thefe 
 .lines : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 '' Aly dearfi/ier^ 
 
 c r-1^ HOUGH I flatter myfclf all my letters 
 
 ' A afford you fome fort of fatisfadlion, yet by 
 
 * what little judgment I have been able to form of 
 ' the temper of your fex, have reafon to believe, 
 « this I now fend will meet a double portion of 
 *■ welcome from you. It brings a confirmation of 
 
 < your beauty's power ; the intelligence of a new 
 
 < conqueft j the offer of a heart, which, if you 
 « will truft a brother's recommendation, is well 
 
 * deferving your acceptance : but, that I may not 
 « feem to fpeak in riddles, you may remember, 
 « that the firft time I had the pleafurc of entertain- 
 
 * Ing you at my rooms, a gentleman called True- 
 
 * worth, was with us, and that the next day, when 
 « you ^\\\^^ with that perfon, who afterwards 
 
 < treated you v/ith fuch unbecoming liberties, he 
 
 * made 
 

<#PG# 89>
7Kf//i Betsy Thoughtless. 79 
 
 ' made one of the company; fincc then you cou'd 
 
 * not fee him, as he was obliged to go to his feat, 
 ' which is about thirty miles ofF, on an extraordi- 
 ' nary occafion, and returned not till the day after 
 ^ you left this town. He feemed more than ordi- 
 ' narily aficdcd, on my telling him what had hap- 
 ' perked, on your account, and after paufmg a lit- 
 
 * tie,. ' How unhappy was I,* faid be, ' to be ab- 
 *' fent ! had I been here, there would have been no 
 *' need for the brother of Mifs Betfy to have cx- 
 '* pofed his life to the fword of an injurious anU- 
 *« gonift, or his chara£^er to the cenfure of the 
 " univerfity. I would have taken upon myfclf to 
 *' have revenged the quarrel of that amiable lady^ 
 ** and either have feverely chaftifed the infolcnce 
 •' of the aggreflbr, or lolt the bcft part of my 
 " blood in the attempt.* I was very much fur- 
 
 * prized fat thefe words, as well as at the emphafis 
 
 * with which they were delivered ; but recovering 
 
 * myfclf as foon as I could, ' We arc extremely 
 '* obliged to you, Sir,' fiid I, * but I know not 
 «« if fuch a miftaken generofity, might not have 
 *' been fatal to the reputation of us both. What 
 ^^ would the world have faid of me to have been 
 •* tamely pafTive, and fuffcr another to revenge 
 ** the affront offered to my fiffer ? What would 
 ** they have thought of her, on finding her honour 
 *' vindicated by one who had no concern in it ?* 
 ' No concern !' cried he with the utmoft eagernefs ; 
 *' yes, I have a concern, more deep, moreftrong, 
 '^ than that of father, brother, or all the ties of 
 *' blood could give ; and that you had before now 
 *' have been convinced of, had I not been fo fud- 
 *'. denly and fo unfortunately called hence/ 
 
 ' Perceiving I looked very much confounded, a« 
 
 * well I might, ' Ah ! Frank,' cried he, * I love 
 •' your charming fifter : my friends have, for thefe 
 ** fix months paft, been teizing me to think of 
 
 E 4 ** marriage, 
 

<#PG# 90>
So The HIST ORY of 
 
 ** marriage, and fcveral propofals have been made 
 *' to me on that fcore ; but never, 'till I faw the 
 •' amiable Mifs Betfy, did I behold the face for 
 '* whom I would exchange my liberty : in fine, 
 *' 'tis file, and only fhe, can make me blefl ; and 
 " I returned to Oxford full of the hopes of an op- 
 *' portunity to lay my heart, my pcrfon, and my 
 •* fortune at her feet.' 
 
 ' It would require a volume inflead of a letter, 
 
 * to repeat half the tender and paffionate exprcf- 
 
 * fions he uttered in your favour. What I have 
 
 * already faid is enough to give you a fpecimen of 
 
 * the refl. I fhall only add, that being impa- 
 ' tient to begin the attack he is determined to make 
 ' upon your heart, he is preparing to follow you 
 
 * to London with all poflible expedition. I once 
 
 * had thoughts of accompanying him, but have 
 
 * fince thought it proper to have Sir Ralph Trufly's 
 
 * advice in fomething I have a mind to do, and for 
 
 * that purpofe fhall take a journey into L e, 
 
 * as foon as I receive remittances from Mr. Good- 
 
 * man, to pay off fome trifling debts f have con- 
 
 * trailed here, and defray my travelling expences -, 
 
 * fo that, if things happen as I wifh they may, my 
 
 * friend's paflion will have made a confiderable pro- 
 
 * grefs before I fee you. 
 
 ' Indeed, my dear fifler, if you have not already. 
 
 * fecn a man whofe perfon you like better, you caix 
 ' never have an offer that promifcs more felicity: 
 ' he left the college foon after I came into it, be.r 
 '• loved and refpe(Sted by all that knew him, for his. 
 
 * difcreetbehaviour,humanity,and affability: he went 
 ' afterwards on his travels, and brought home with. 
 
 * him all the accomplifliments of the fcveral countries 
 
 * he had been in, without beih • the leaff tainted with 
 
 * the vices or fopperies of any of them : he has a much 
 ' larger ellate than your fortune could cxpe6l, un- 
 
 * incumbered with debts, mortgages, or poor re- 
 
 lations : 
 

<#PG# 91>
il///} Betsy Thoughtless. Si 
 
 * lations : his family is ancient, and, by the mo- 
 ' thcr's fide, honourable ; but, above all, he has 
 ' fenfc, honour, and good-nature,— rare qua- 
 
 * litics ! which, in my opinion, cannot fail of 
 ' making him an excellent hufband, whenever he 
 
 * comes to be fuch. 
 
 ' But I fliall leave him to plead his own caufe, 
 ' and you to follow your inclinations. I am, 
 ' With the molt unfei2;ned good wifhes, 
 ' My dear fiftcr, 
 * Your afFedionate brother, 
 ' And humble fervant, 
 
 ' F. Thoughtless. 
 
 ' P. S. Mr. Trueworth knows noi'.iing of my writ- 
 
 * ing to you in his behalf, i'o you arc at liberty 
 
 * to receive him as you fliall thi:ik proper.' 
 
 Mifs Bctfy required no lefi a cordial than this, to 
 revive her fpirits, pretty much deprefied fmcc her 
 ill ufage at Oxford. 
 
 She had Jiot time, however, to indulqe the plea- 
 fure of rcfle(rting on this new triumph^ on her firft 
 receiving the news of it. Lady Mcilafin had fct 
 that evening apart to m?.ke a grand vifit to a pcrfoii 
 of her acquaintance, who was juft married ; the 
 young ladies were to accompany her, and Mifj 
 Betfy was in the midft of the hurry of drefling, 
 when the port brought the letter, fo (he only look- 
 ed it carelefslv over, and locked it in her cabinet 
 till {he fiiould have more Icifure for the examina- 
 tion. They were all ready, the coach witli the 
 
 beft hammock-cloth and harnciTes was at the door, 
 and only waited while Mrs. Prinks was drawing on 
 lier lady's gloves, which happened to be a little too 
 {trait. 
 
 In this unlucky indanf one of the footmen cnrre 
 
 running into the parlour, and told lady Mi-ilafin, 
 
 E 5 tha: 
 

<#PG# 92>
Si Ihg H I STO R Y o/- 
 
 that there was a very ill-looking woman at thfe 
 door, who cnquirccl for her ladydiip, faitl fhe muft 
 needs fpeak with her, and that fhe had a letter to 
 deliver, whicli flie would give into nobody's hand 
 but her ov/n. Lady Mcliafin Teemed a little angry 
 at the infolence and folly of the creature, as fhe 
 then termed it^; but ordered llie (hould be (hewed 
 into the back parlour ; they were not above five 
 minutes together, before the woman went away, 
 and lady Mellafin returned to the room whero 
 Mifs Betfy and Mifs Flora were waiting for her. A 
 confufion not to be defcribed fat on every feature 
 in her face, fhe looked pale, (he trembled, and 
 having told the young ladies fomething had liap- 
 pened, which prevented her going where die in- 
 tended, flew up into her drefling-room, followed by 
 Mrs. Prinks, who appeared very much alarmed at 
 feeing her ladyfliip in this diforder. 
 
 Mils Betfy and Mifs Flora were alfo furprifed, 
 and doubtlefs had their own conjedlures upon this 
 fudden turn. 'Tis not likely, however, that cither 
 ■of them, efijccially Mifs Betfy, could hit upon the 
 right ; but whatever their thoughts were, they 
 communicated them, not to each other, and feemed 
 only intent on confidering in what manner they 
 Ihould difpofe of themfelves that evening, it not 
 being proper they (hould make the vijit above 
 mentioned without her ladyfhip. As they were dif- 
 t:ourfing on this head, Mrs. Prinks came down, 
 and having ordered the coach to put up, and fent a 
 footman to call a hack, ran up flairs again, in a 
 great hurry, to her lady. 
 
 In lefs time than could almoft be imagined they 
 both came down; lady Mellafin had pulled oft' her 
 rich apparel, and mobbed herfelf up in a cloak and 
 hood, that little of her face, and nothing of her air, 
 coirid be -difiinguifhed : the too young ladies ftar- 
 cd, and were confounded at tliis nietamorphofis. 
 
 ''' U 
 

<#PG# 93>
ilf//} "Betsy Thoughtless. 8^ 
 
 ^ Is your ladyfhip going out in that drcs," cried 
 Mifs Flora J but Mifs Betfy faid nothing " Aye, 
 •' child," replied the lady, fomewhat faultcring 
 in her fpeech, " a poor relation, who they fay is 
 *' dying, has fent to beg to fee me.'* She faid 
 no more, the hackney-coach was come, her la- 
 dyfhip and Mrs. Prinks ftepped haftily into it; tlie 
 latter, in doing (o, telling the coachjnan, in fo low 
 a voice, as no body but himfelf could hear, to what 
 place he was to drive. 
 
 After they were gone, Mifs Flora prcpofed 
 walking in the pirk ; but Mifs Betfy did not hap- 
 pen to be in a humour to go, either there or .any 
 where elfc, at that time, on which tlie other told 
 her, fhe had got the iplecn ; but faid flie, " I am 
 *' refolved not to be infe«5icd with it, To you muft 
 ** net take it '!1 it" I leave you alone Ir r a few 
 '' hours ; for I fnould think it a fin againfl: com- 
 *' mon-fcnfe, to fit moping at home witlwut fliev/- 
 *' ing myfclf to any one foul in the world, after 
 *' having; taken all this pains in drefHng.'* Mifs 
 Betfy afiured her, as (he might do with a great 
 deal of fincerity, that flie fnould not be at all dif- 
 pleafed to be entirely free from any company 
 whatfoever for the whole evening ; and to prove 
 the truth of v/hat file faid, gave orders that inflant 
 lo be denied to whoever fliould come to vifit her. 
 *' Well," cried Mifs Flora, laughing, *' I (hall 
 *' give your compliments, however, where I am 
 *' going," and then mentioned the names of fomc 
 perfons fhe had juft then taken into her head to 
 vifit. '' As 3^ou pleafe for that," replied Miii 
 Betfy, with the fame gay air ; " but don't tell 
 *' them it is becaufe I am eaten up with the va- 
 " pours, that I chofe to ilay at home rather than 
 *' carry my compliments in perfon ; for if ever I 
 continued fhe, *' that you are fa 
 * mifcjiievous, 
 

<#PG# 94>
84 The HISTORY of 
 
 *' mirchiLvous, I fhall contrive fome way or other 
 
 " to be revenged on you." 
 
 They talked to each other in this pleafant man- 
 ner, 'till a chair Mifs Flora had fent for vi^as 
 brought into the hall, in which fhe feated herfelf 
 for her intended ramble, and Mifs Betfy went into 
 her chamber, where how fhe was amufed will pre- 
 fently be fhewn. 
 
 CHAP. XIL 
 
 Is little more than a continuance of the former. 
 
 MISS Betfy had no fooner difengaged herfelf 
 from the incumbrance of a formal drefs, 
 and put on one more light and eafy, al frefco, as 
 the Spaniards phrafe it, than Ihe began to give her 
 brother's letter a more ferious and attentive perufal, 
 than Tne had the opportunity of doing before. 
 
 She was charmed and ellated with the dcfcription 
 Mr. Francis had told her, fhe had infpired in the 
 brcaft of his friend \ fhe called to her mind the idea 
 of thofe perfons who were prefent at the entertain- 
 ments he mentioned, and eafily recollecSled which 
 was moil: likely to be the lover, though fhe remem- 
 bered not the name : fhe very well now remem- 
 bered there v/as one that feemed both times to re- 
 gard her with glances, v^hich had fomewhat pe- 
 culiar in them, and which then flie had interpret- 
 ed as the certain indications of feeling fomething 
 in his heart of the nature her brother had de?- 
 fcribed ; but not feeing him afterwards, nor hear- 
 ing any mention made of him, at lead that fhe 
 took notice of, the imagination went out of her 
 head. 
 
 This account of him, however, brought to her 
 memory every thing fhe had obfervcd concern- 
 ing 
 

<#PG# 95>
JW/yGrBETSv Thoughtless. 85 
 
 ing bim, and was very well convinced fhe had 
 feen nothing, either in his pcrfon or deportment, 
 that was not perfectly agreeable j yet notwithstand- 
 ing all this, and the high encomiums given of him 
 by a brother, who flie knew would not deceive 
 ber, {he was a little vexed to find herfelf prcllcd by 
 one (o dear, and fo nearly related to her, to think 
 of him as a man (he ever intended to marry : (he 
 thought (he could be pleafcd to have fuch a lover, 
 but could not bring herfelf to be content that he 
 ever (hould be a hull)and. She had too much good 
 fenfe not to know it fuitcd not with the condition 
 of a wife to indulge herfelf in the gaieties flie at 
 prefent did, which though innocent, and, as fhc 
 thought, becoming enough in the prefent f^ate file 
 now was, might not be altogether pleafmg to one, 
 who, if he fo thought proper, had the power of 
 reflraining them. Jn fine, (he looked upon a fe- 
 rious behaviour as unfuitable to one of her years, 
 and therefore refolved not to enter into a condi- 
 tion, which demanded fome fhare of it, at Icaft 
 for a long time j that is, when (he fliould be 
 grown weary of the admiration, flatteries, and ad- 
 drefTes of the men, and no longer found any plca- 
 fure in feeing herfelf preferred before all the women 
 of her acquaintance. 
 
 Though It is certain, that few young handfome 
 ladi.s are without fome (hare of the vanity here 
 defcribed, yet it is to be hoped, there are not many 
 who are polUfTed of it in that immoderate degree 
 Mifs Betfy was. It is, however, for the fake of 
 thofe who are fo, that thefe pages are wrote, to 
 the end they may ufe their utmoft endeavours 
 to corre6l that error, as they will find it (o fatal 
 to the happinefs of one, who had fcarce any 0- 
 ther blameable propenfity in her whole com por- 
 tion . 
 
 This 
 

<#PG# 96>
S6 The HISTORY cf 
 
 This young lady was full of meditations oh her 
 new conqueft, and the manner in which fhe fh^uld 
 receive the vi6lim, who was (o fhortly to proHrate 
 himfclf at the {hrine of her beauty, when (he 
 heard fome body run hailily up flairs, and go into 
 lady Mellafin's dreffing-room, which being, as has 
 been already taken notice of, on a very remarka- 
 ble occaiion, fhc ftepped out of the chamber to fee 
 who was there, and found Mrs. Prinks very buiy 
 at a cabinet, where her lady's jewels were always 
 kept : " So, Mrs. Prinks," faid fhe, is my lady 
 '« come home ?" " No Mifs," replied the other, 
 " her ladyfliip is certainly the moft compaffionate 
 " beft 4,1'oman in the world ; her coufin is very 
 " bad indeed, and (he has fent me for a bottle 
 '' of reviving drops, which I am going back to 
 *' carry." With ihefe words fhe fhuffled fome- 
 thing into her pocket, and having locked the cabi- 
 net ag.iin, v/ent out of the room, faying, " Your 
 < fervant, Mifs Betfy, I cannot flay, for life's at 
 «* flake." 
 
 This put Mifs Betfy in the greatcfl confternati- 
 on imaginable; fhe knew lady Mellafin could have 
 no drops in that cabinet, unlefs they were contained 
 in a phial of no larger circumference than a thimble, 
 the drawers of it being very fhallow, and made on- 
 ly to hold rings, croccats, necklaces, and fuch o- 
 ther ftat trinkets : fhe thought there was fomethlng 
 very odd and extraordinary in the whole affair. A 
 flrange woman coming in (o abrupt a manner, — — 
 her refiifing to give the letter to any one but lady 
 Mcllafm herfelf,— ~her ladyfhip's confufion at the 
 
 receipt of it, her difguifing herfelf, and going 
 
 out v/ith Prinks in that violent hurry, the latter 
 
 being fent. home, her taking fomething out of 
 
 the cafket, and her going back again ; all thefe 
 incidents, I fay, when put together, denoted 
 
 fomething 
 

<#PG# 97>
A-/?/} Betsy Thoughtless. 87 
 
 fomething of a myftcry not eafily penetrated 
 into. 
 
 Mifs Betfy, however, was not of a dlfpofition 
 to think too much, or too deeply, on thofe things, 
 which the moft nearly concerned herfelf, much lefs 
 on fuch as' related entirely to other people; and 
 Mifs Flora coming home foon after, and relat- 
 ing what converfation had pafTed in the vilits 
 llie had been making, and the drefies the feveral 
 ladies had on, and fuch other trifling matters, di- 
 verted the other from thofe ferious reflections, 
 wliich might otherwife, perhaps, have lafted fome- 
 what longer. 
 
 VVhen^Mifs Flora was undrefled, they went down 
 together into the parlour, where they found IVIr. 
 Goodman extremely uneafy, that lady Mellafin 
 was not come home: he had been told in what 
 manner flie went out, and it now being grown 
 dark, he was frighted leaft any ill accident (hould 
 befall her, as flie had no man fervant, nor any one 
 with her but her woman, whom, he faid, he could 
 not lock on as a fufllicient guard for a lady of quali- 
 ty, againfl: thofe infults, which night, and the liber- 
 tinifmof the age, frequently produced. 
 
 This tender hufband afked the young ladies a 
 thoufand qucflions, concerning the poflibilit)' of 
 guefllng to whom, and to what part of the town 
 fhe was gone, in order that he might go hirftfelf, 
 or fend a fervant, to condu6l her fafcjy home ; but 
 neither of them were able to inform himany tliingfar- 
 ther, thanwhat has been already related; that {he had 
 been fent for to a fick relation, who, as it appeared 
 to them, had been very prefling to engage her lady- 
 ship to that charitable office. 
 
 Mr. Goodman then began to endeavour to re- 
 colledl the names and places of abode, of all thcfe 
 he had ever heard her fay were of her kindred, for 
 (he had never fuffcred any of them to come to the 
 
 houfc/ 
 

<#PG# 98>
S8 Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 houfe, under pretence that Tome of them had not 
 behaved well, and that others being fallen to decay, 
 and poor, might expe(St favours from her, and that 
 fhe would fuffcr no body belonging to her to be bur- 
 thenfome lo him. 
 
 He u'as, notwithftanding, about to fend his men 
 in fearch of his beloved lady, though he knew not 
 where to dircd them to go, when flic and Mrs. 
 Prinks came home : he received her with all the 
 tranfports a man of his years could be capable of, 
 but gently chid her for the little care (lie had taken 
 of herfelf, and looking on her, as Mrs. Prinks was 
 pulling off her hood, '* Blefs me, my dear," faid 
 lie, '* what was your fancy for going out in fuch 
 " a drefs ?" *' My couftn," replied Ihe, is in ve- 
 '* ry wretched circumflances, lives in a little mean 
 '* lodging, and, behdes, owes money ; if I had 
 " gone any tiling like myfelf, the people of the 
 *' houfe might have expected great things from 
 *' me. I am very compailionate, indeed, to e- 
 *^ very one under misfortunes, but will ne- 
 '' ver fquander Mr. Gool; jian's money for ihtii* 
 
 C( 
 
 elief." 
 
 " 1 know thou* art all good nefs," faid the old 
 gentleman, kiiiing her with the utmoft tendernefs ; 
 " but fomething," continued he, " mcthinks, 
 " might be fparcd" " Leave it to me, Mr. 
 *' Goodman," anfwered flie, " I know beft, — — ■ 
 *' they have not deferved it from me :" She then 
 told a long ftory, how kind fhe had been to this 
 coiifin, and fume others of her kindred in her 
 firft hufband's time, and gave fomc inftances of the 
 ill ufe they had made of her bounties. All file 
 faid had fo much the appearance of truth, that 
 even Mifs Betfy, who was far from having an high 
 opinion of her fmcerity, believed it, and thought 
 no farther of v/hat had pafTed j fhe bad indeed, in ^ 
 
 ihort 
 

<#PG# 99>
M^fs Betsy Thoughtless. S9 
 
 fhort time, fufHcient bufinefs of her own to take 
 up all her mind. 
 
 Mr. Goodman, the very next day, brought 
 home a very agreeable ycung gentleman to dine 
 with him, who, though he paid an extraordinary 
 refpec^l: to lady Mellafin, and treated h.er daughter 
 with the utmoft complaifance, yet in the compli- 
 ments he made to Mifs Belfy, there was fomcthing 
 which feemcd to tell her fhc had infpir^d him with 
 a pafTion more tender than bare rcfpcifi, and more 
 fmcere than common complaifance. 
 
 She had very penetrating eyes this way, and ne- 
 ver made a conqueil: without knowing ihe did fo ; 
 fhe was not, therefore, wanting in all thofe little 
 artifices (he had but too much made her fludy, in 
 order to fix the impreflion (he had given tl.is 
 flranger as indcliable as pofTible : this (he had a very 
 good opportunity for doing ; he flayed the whole 
 afternoon, drank tea witli the ladies, vs,d left th^m 
 not, 'till a crov/d (>f company coming in, he thought 
 good manners obliged him to retire. 
 
 Mifs Betfy was filLa with the mofl: impatient 
 curiofity to know the name and character of this 
 perfon, whom fnc had already fet down in her 
 mind as a new adorer : fhe afked Mifs Flora when 
 they were going to bed, as if it were a matter of 
 indifference to her, and meerly for the fake of chat, 
 who that gentleman was who had dined with them, 
 and made fo long a vifit ; but that young lady had 
 never feen him before, and was as ignorant of every 
 thing concerning him, as herfelf. 
 
 Mifs Betfy, however, lofl no part of her repofc 
 that night, on this account, as fhe doubted not but 
 fhe fhould very foon be informed by himfelf of all 
 flie wifhed to know : fhe was but juft out of bed 
 the next morning, when a maid-fervant came in- 
 to the chamber, and delivered a letter to her, 
 
 which 
 

<#PG# 100>
go Thi HISTORY cf 
 
 whith (lie told her was brought by a porter, who 
 waited for an anfvvcr. 
 
 Mifs Bctfy's heart fluttered at the mention of a 
 letter, flattering hcrfelf it came from tlie pcrfon, 
 who at prefcnt engrofled her thoughts j but on tak- 
 ing it from the maid, fouiid a vv'oman's hand on 
 the fupcrfcription, and one perfectly known to her, 
 though that infiant fhe could not reflect to whom 
 it belonged : (he v/as a good deal furprifed, when 
 on breaking the feal (lie fojnd it came from Rlifs 
 f'orward, wltii whom, as well as the reft ef the 
 boarding-fchool ladies, €aQ haJ ceafed all corre- 
 fpondence for many months. The contents wercJ 
 thefe : 
 
 To Mifs Bet£Y Thoughtless', 
 
 <« Dear Mifs Eccfv, 
 
 ic ^-pHOUGFI fmce I had the pleafure of fcs- 
 
 «' -i. ing 'or heai ing from you, fo many acci- 
 
 '^ dents, and odd turns of fortune, have h;ippen- 
 
 '^ ed to me, as might very well engrofs my 
 
 *' wliole attention; yet T cannot be fo far forget-' 
 
 '* ful of our former friendf}-iip, as to be in the 
 
 *' fametOA'n wkh you, without letting }cu know, 
 
 *' and defning to fee you. Were there a pofTibi- 
 
 '' lity of my w^aiting on you, I certainly fhould 
 
 «' have made you the firfl vifit ; but alas ! at prc- 
 
 «« fent there is not. Oh ! Mifs Betfy, I have 
 
 '' flrange things to tell you ; things fit only to 
 
 <' be trufled to a perfon whofe generofity and 
 
 *' good nature I have experienced. If therefore 
 
 <' you are fo good to come, I muft intreat you" 
 
 *' will bring no companion with you, and alfa 
 
 *' that you will allow me that favour the firft 
 
 *^ Je fure hour; becaufe I am in fome hopes of re- 
 
 •' turnirjg to L e in a fhort time. Pleafe 
 
 *' to enquire for the houfe of one Mrs. Night- 
 
 " fhade, 
 

<#PG# 101>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. gt 
 
 ** fhade, in Chick-lane, near Smitiifield, where 
 " you will find her, who, in fpite of time, ab- 
 " f.-nce, and a thoufand perplexing circumftan- 
 " CCS, is 
 
 *' With the moft tender regard, 
 " My dear Mifs Bctly, 
 " Your very fmcere, 
 
 *' Though unfortunate, friend, . 
 " A. Forward 
 
 *' P. S. Be To good to let me know, by a line, 
 *' whether I may flatter myfclf with the hupei 
 <« of feeing you, and at what time," 
 
 Though Mifs Eetfy, through the hurry cf her 
 own affairs, had neglected writing to this young 
 lady for a confidcrable time ; yet fhe was extreme- 
 ly pleafed at hearing from her : fhe could not ima- 
 gine, however, what flrange turns of fortune they 
 were fhe mentioned in her letter, and which fne 
 fuppofed had brought her to London. Equally im- 
 patient to fatisfy her curiofity in this point, as to fee 
 a perfon with whom (he had contraded her firft 
 ffiendfliip, fhe took pen and paper and immediate- 
 ly wrote this anfwer : 
 
 To Mifs Forward. 
 
 * ' D^ ar Afifs Forward, 
 cc 'I ^ II E fatisfadiion of hearing you were fo 
 *' X near me would be compleat, were it not 
 '' allayed by the hints you give, that fome acci- 
 *' denrs, not altogether pleafm -, had occafioned it. 
 " I long to hear what has happened to you, fmce 
 *' laft we faw each other, and will not fail to wait 
 ** on you this afternoon. I know nothing of the 
 *' part of the town you are in, but fuppofe a 
 " hackney-coach will be able to find its way. I 
 
 •' will 
 

<#PG# 102>
92 ne HISTORY cf 
 
 " will detain your meflenger no ionger, than to 
 '^ tdl you that I am, 
 
 " With the moft perfect amity, 
 
 " Deer Mifs P'orward, 
 *' Your very aficdionate fricnJ, 
 
 " And humble fervant, 
 " E. Thoughtless." 
 
 , Mifs Flora had not been prefent v.-hen the maid 
 delivered the letter to Mifs Bttfy ; but coming in- 
 to the chamber juO: as fliC had iiniihsed, and was 
 fcaling up the anlwer to it : *' So," faid Oie, 
 '• have I catch'd you ? Pray what new lover have 
 " you been writing to this morning ?*'' k was in 
 vain ^hat Mifs Betfy told her, fne never yet had 
 fcen the man flie thought worthy of a letter from 
 her, on the fcore of love : the other perfifted in her 
 affeverations ; and Mifs Betfy to filence her railery 
 was obliged to fhcvv her fome part of the letter flie 
 had received from Mifs Forvi'ard. 
 
 It bciiig near brcakfaft time tliey went dov.'n to- 
 gether into the parlour, and as they were drinking 
 their Coffee, *' Well, pretty lady," faid Mr. 
 Goodman to Mifs Betfy, with a fmile, ** how 
 ** did you like the gentleman that dined here ye- 
 " flerday." This queftion fo much furprifed her, 
 that fhe could not help bluihing. *' Like him, 
 " Sir," replied (he, " I did not take any notice 
 
 " of him. I remember a ftranger was here, 
 
 " and (laid a good while, and that is all ; for I 
 " neither obferved any thing he faid, or did, or 
 '* thought on him fmce." " The agreeable con- 
 " fufion." " cried Mr. Goodman, gaily, " you 
 *' are in at my mentioning him, makes me believe 
 *' you remarked him more than you are willing to 
 
 " acknowledge, and I am very glad of it. Vou 
 
 " do him but juftice I afTure you, for he is very 
 •' much in love with you. 
 
 " Lord, 
 

<#PG# 103>
M'lfs Betsy Thought liss. g'^ 
 
 *' Lord, Sir," faid MiA Eafy, blueing flill 
 more, " I cannot imagine what makes you talk 
 ^^ io ; I don*t fuppofe the man thinks of me any 
 " more than I do of him. *' That may be," re- 
 joined he" laughing outright. Lady Mellafin then 
 took up the word, and tuld her hufband, he was 
 very merry that morning. *' Aye," Hiid he, 
 " the hurry of fpirits I liave put poor Mifs Betfy 
 *' in, has made me (o ; but 1 can affure you the 
 *' thing is very ferious ; but," continued he, " you 
 '^ {ball know the whole of it." 
 
 He then proceeded to inform them, that the 
 perfon he had been fpeaking of, was the Ton of one 
 who had formerly been a merchant j but who hav- 
 ing acquired a large fortune by his induflrv, hatl 
 for feveral years pafl: left off bufinefs, and lived 
 moflly in the country ; that the young gentleman 
 had fccn Mifs Betfy at St. Paul's rehear fal, when 
 they were all there to hear the mufic ; that the 
 next day afcer, he had come to him at a cofFec- 
 houfe, which it was known he frequented, and af- 
 ter afking many queftions concerning Mifs Betfyj 
 and hearing flic was not engnged, declared he was 
 very much charmed with her, and entreated his 
 permiflion, as being her guardian, to make his ad- 
 drcfies to her. Mr. Goodman remembered the 
 affront he had received from alderman Savinf^ on a 
 like occafion, -and was determined not to lay him- 
 felfopcn to the fame from Mr. Staple, ( for (o he 
 was called,) and plainly told the young lover, that 
 he would encourage nothing of that fort, v.'ithout 
 the approbation of his father ; that after this he 
 had a meeting with the old gentleman, who being 
 fully fatisfied by him of Mifs Betfy's family, fortune, 
 and charader, had no objeiSlions to make as^ainft 
 his fon's inclinations. " Having this fanctlon," 
 . continued Mr. Goodman, " and believing it may be 
 *' a very proper match for both of you," I brought 
 
 '* hun 
 

<#PG# 104>
9+ The HISTORY cf 
 
 '' him home with me to dinner yefterday, and 
 *' fiiould be glad to know how far you think you 
 *' can approve of the offer before I give him my 
 '* confent to makeit." 
 
 '* I have already told you, Sir," replied Mifs 
 Betfy, " that I took but little notice of the gcntle- 
 " man;- -or, if I had, fhould never have afked 
 *' myfelf the queflion, whether I could like him or 
 *' not ; for as to marriage, I do afllire you, Sir, it is 
 •' a thing that has never yet entered into my head." 
 *' Nay, as to that," returned he, " it is time e- 
 
 *' nough, indeed. A good hufband, however^ 
 
 *' can never come unfeafonable. — I fliall tell him, 
 *' hemay vifit you, and leave you to anfvver the 
 " addrefles according to the didates of your 
 " heart." 
 
 Mifs Betfy neither oppofed, nor gave confent to 
 what her guardian faid, on this fcore ; but her not 
 refufing feemed to him a fufficient grant : fo there 
 pafTed rothing more, except fome little pleafantries 
 ufual on fuch fubjeds. 
 
 CHAP. xiir. 
 
 Coniahjs fome part of the hijlory of M'lfs Forward's 
 adventures^ from the time of her leaving the 
 boar ding- fchool^ as related by her her f elf to Mifs 
 Betfy. 
 
 I S S Betfy had now her head, though not 
 her heart, full of the two new conqueiis Ihe 
 had made : Mr. Trueworth was flrongly recom- 
 mended by her brother, — Mr. Staple by her guar-* 
 dian ; yet all the idea fhe had of either of them, 
 ferved only to excite in her the pleafing imagina- 
 tion how, when they both came to addrefs her, {he 
 fhould pliiy the one againft the other, and give her- 
 
 felf 
 

<#PG# 105>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 95 
 
 felf a conftant round of diverfion, by their alternate 
 contentment or tlifquiet. As the barometer, faid 
 flie to herfelf, is governed by the weather, To is the 
 man in love governed by the woman he admires : 
 
 he is a meer machine, atfts nothing of himfclf,— 
 
 has no will or power of his own, but is lifted up, 
 or deprefll-d, juit as the charm.er of his heart is in 
 the humour. I wifli, continued {he, I knew what 
 
 day thefe poor ci'eatures would come, though 
 
 *tis no matter, 1 have got it fcems pofiefiion cf 
 
 their hearts, and their eyes will find graces in me, 
 let me appear in what Ihapc foever. 
 
 Thefe contemplations, however enchanting as 
 they were to her vanity, did not render her forget- 
 ful of the promife fhe had made Mifs Forward, and, 
 as foon as dinner was over, ordered a hackney- 
 coach to be called, and went to the place Adifs 
 Forward's letter had direjStcd. 
 
 It is fcarce poffible for any one to be more fur- 
 prifed than {l:ic was, en entering the houfe of Mrs. 
 Nightiliadc. Tlie father of Mifs P'orward was a 
 gentleman of a large cftate, and of great confide* 
 ration in the coun'y where he lived, and fhe ex- 
 pelled to have ften his daughter in lodgings fuiiable 
 to her birih and fortune : inllcad of which, fhe 
 found hcrfelf condi:«5lcd by an old iil-looked mean 
 woman, who gave her to underlland fhe was the 
 miflrefs of the houfe, up tv/o-pair-of-frairs, fo nar- 
 row tb.at fhe was obliged to hold her hoop quite 
 under her arm, in order to gain the fleep, and al- 
 
 mofl perpendicular afcetU: fhe v/as then fhew^ 
 
 ed into a li'.tle dirty chamber, where on a wretclicd 
 bed Mifs Forward lay in a mod melancholy ari 
 dtje6led pofture. " Here is a lady wants yoi','* 
 faid the hag, who ufliered in Mifs Betfy. Thefe 
 Words, and the opening the door, made Mifs 
 Forward ftart from the bed to receive h^z viiitor 
 ill the bell manner fhe could : fhe falu-cJ, fhe em- 
 braced 
 

<#PG# 106>
zj6 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 braced her with all the demonftrations of joy and 
 afFcdion ; but Mifs Betfy was To confounded at 
 the appearance of every thing about her, that fhe 
 was almoll incapable of returning hercarefTes. 
 
 * Mifs P'orward eafily perceived the confufion her 
 friend was in, and having lead her to a chair, and 
 feated hcrfcif near her, " My dear Mils Betfy," 
 faid (he, " I do not wonder you are alarmed at 
 " finding me in a condition fo different from what 
 *' you might have expected : my letter indeed gave 
 *'' you a hint of fome misfortunes that had befallen 
 *' me; but I forbore letting you know of what 
 '• nature they v/ere, becaufe the fads, v^'ithout 
 " the circumftances, which would have been too 
 *• long to communicate by writing, might have 
 " made me appear more criminal, than I flatter my- 
 *' felf you will think I really am, when you fhall 
 '' be tokl the v.'hole of my unhappy flory.'* 
 
 ■ Mifs Betfy "then allured her, fhe fhould take a 
 friendly part in every thing that had happened to 
 her, and that nothing could oblige her more than 
 the confidence (he mentioned : on which the other 
 taking her by the hand, and letting fall fome tears, 
 
 faid, " O Mifs Betfy ! Mifs Betfy, 1 have fuf- 
 
 " fered much^ and if you find a great deal to blame 
 '^ me for, you will find yet much more to pity." 
 Then after having paufed a little, as if to recoiled 
 the pafTages fhe was about to relate, began in 
 this manner : 
 
 ' You muft remember,' faid fhe, ' that when 
 
 * you left us to go for London, I was ftridly watch- 
 ' ed and confined, on account of my innocent 
 ' correfpondence with Mr. Sparkifh ; but that 
 
 * young gentleman being fent to the univcrfity foon 
 
 * after, I had the fame liberty as ever, and as 
 ' much as any young lady in the fchool. The tu- 
 ' torefs, who v/as with us in your time, being in 
 
 * an ill Itate of health, went away, and one Ma- 
 
 " dcnioifellc 
 

<#PG# 107>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 97 
 
 * demoifelle Grenouille, a French woman, was 
 
 * put in her place : the governefs had a high opi- 
 ' nionofher, not only on the fcoreof the charac- 
 
 * ter (he had of her, but alfo for the gravity of her 
 
 * behaviour. But as demure, however, as fhe af- 
 ' fe6led to be before her, (he could be as merry and 
 
 * facetious as ourfelves, when out of her fight, as 
 ' you will foon perceive by what I have to tell 
 
 * you. 
 
 * Whenever any of us took an evening's walk, 
 
 * this was the pcrfon to wliofe care we were en- 
 
 * truilcd, the governefs growing every day more 
 
 * infirm, and indeed unable to attend us. 
 
 ' It was towards the clofe of a very hot day, that 
 
 * myfelf, and two more, went with Mademoifelle 
 
 * Grenouille to take a little air in the lane, at the 
 
 * backfide of the great road, that leads up to lord 
 € ***'g ^pg fg2t. We were about the miJtilc of 
 ' the lane when we heard the found of Frcnch- 
 
 * horns, double-curtails, and other inftruments of 
 
 * wind-mufic : Mademoifelle at this couid not re- 
 
 * (train the natural alertnefs of her count rv, but 
 
 * went dancing on, 'till we came very near thole 
 
 * that played. 
 
 * You muft know, my dear Mifs Betfv,' con* 
 tinued fhe, 'that my lord ***'s park wall reaches 
 
 to the bottom of this lane, and has a little gate 
 into it : having, it feems, fome company with 
 him, he had ordered two tents to be ere(5^cd in 
 that part of the park ; the one for himfeif and 
 friends, the other for the mufic, who founded 
 the inftruments to the healths were toaflcd : but 
 this we being ignorant of, and delighted with the 
 harmony, wand red on till we came clofe to the 
 little gate I mentioned, and there ftood iliil liflen- 
 ing to it. Some one or other of the gemkmen 
 faw us, and faid to the others, ' We have EveV 
 droppers j* on which they quitted their feats, and 
 Vol, I. F ' ran 
 

<#PG# 108>
98 ra^ H I S T O R Y ^/ 
 
 * ran to the gate : on feeing them all approach, we 
 ' Would have drawn back, but they were too 
 
 * quick for us ; the gate was inftantly thrown open, 
 
 * and fix or fcven gentlemen, of whom my lord 
 ' himfclf was one, rufhed out upon us. Perceivinij 
 
 * we endeavoured to efcape them, they catched 
 ' hold of us, * Nay, ladies,' faid one of them, 
 
 * you muft not think to avoid paying the piper, af- 
 
 * ter having heard his mufic. 
 
 ' Mademoifelle, on this, addreflcd herfelf to my 
 
 * lord * * *, vvith as much formality as fhc could 
 ' aflume, and told him, wc v/erc young ladies of 
 
 * dillindion, who were placed at a boarding fchool 
 ' juft by, and at prcfcnt were under her care, (q 
 
 * begged no rudenefs miglit be offered. His lord- 
 ' fhip protellcd on his honour none fhould ; but 
 
 * infifted on our coming into the park, and drink- 
 
 * ing one glafs of whatever wine we pleafed -, upon 
 « which, * What fay you, ladies ?* cried Made- 
 
 * moifelle, ' I believe wc may depend on his lord- 
 *' fnip's prote;51ion/ None of us oppofed the mo- 
 ' tion, as being as glad to accept it as herfelf. In 
 
 * fine, we went in, and v/ere condu<5^ed to th^ 
 ' tent, ii} the mid ft of which were placed bottles, 
 < glalTes, jeliies, fweetmeats, pickles, and I know 
 ' not what other things to regale and quicken the 
 
 * appetite. Servants, who attended, cooled the 
 
 * glafTcs out of a filver fountain, on a little pedeftal, 
 ' at the one end of the tent, and filled every one a 
 ' glafs with what each of us chofe. One of the 
 « company perceiving our condudrefs was a French- 
 .< woman, talked to her in her own language, and 
 « led her a minuctte round the table ; and, in the 
 « mean time, the others took the opportunity of 
 
 * enter! ainin? us : he that had hold of me, fo plied 
 ' me with kilTcs and embraces, I (carce knew where 
 « I was. — ^Oh! the difference between his ca- 
 « ,rcfies and the boyifli infipid falutu of mailer Spar- 
 
 ' kifn ! 
 

<#PG# 109>
Mifs Betsy Though tlkss. 9'-) 
 
 * kifh ! The others, I fuppofe, were fervcd with 
 
 * the fame agreeable robuftnefs I was ; but I 
 
 * had not the power of oblciving them, any more 
 
 * than, as I afterwards found, they had of me. 
 
 * In fine, never were poor innocent girls fo pref- 
 
 * fed, fo killed : every thing but the dernier 
 
 ' undoing deed, and that there was no opportunity ot 
 
 * compleating, every one of us, our tutorefs not 
 
 * excepted, I am certain experienced. 
 
 " Heavens !" cried Mifs Betfv, interrupting her, 
 *' how I envied your happinefs a moment lincc, 
 " and how I tremble fpr you now," 
 
 ' O Mifs Bctfy, replied Mifs Forward, every 
 ' thing would have been done in that forgetful 
 ' hour J but as I have already faid, there was net 
 
 * an opportunity. My lover notwithflanuing, for 
 ' fa I muft call him, would not kt me get out of 
 ' his arms, till I had told him my name, ai;d bv 
 
 what means he fliould convey a letter to me. I 
 afFcdled to make a fcruplc of granting this rcqiiefi", 
 though heaven knows I was but too well pie?. fed 
 at his grafping me flill fafler, in order to compel 
 me to it. I then gave him my name, und told 
 
 ' him, that if he would needs write, I knew no 
 other way by which lie might be lure ot my re- 
 ceiving his k-tters, but by llippii^.g it into my 
 
 < hand as I was coming out of chuich, which he 
 might eafily do, there being always a great con- 
 courfe of people about the J.oor ; \in this he gave 
 me a falute, the warmth of v/hich I never Tnall 
 
 ' forget, and then fuffered me to depart with my 
 companions, who, if they were not quite i'o 
 much engaged as myftlf, had yet enough to make 
 
 * them remember this night's i amble. 
 
 ' The tutorefs knew well enough how to excufe 
 
 * our flaying out {o much longer than ufual, and 
 
 * neither the governefs, nor any one ii^ the f^imily, 
 
 * except ouifclves, knew any thin^ cf what had 
 
 F 2 <*' pulT.d. 
 

<#PG# 110>
loo n^ H I STORY of 
 
 * pafTcd. I cannot fay but my head ran extremely 
 
 * on this adventure. I heartily wiflied my pretty 
 
 * fellow might keep his word in writing to mc, and 
 
 * was forming a thoufand projeds how to keep 
 
 * up a correfpondence with him. I don't tell you 
 
 < I was what they call in love ; but certainly I was 
 ^ very near it, and longed much more for Sunday 
 
 < than ever I had done for a new gown : at laft the 
 
 * willied-for day arrived, my gentleman was 
 
 < punctual, — —he came clofe to mc in the church* 
 
 * porch, 1 held my hand in a carclefs manner, 
 
 * with my handkerchief in it, behind me, and pre- 
 
 * fently found fomcthing put into it, which I hafti- 
 
 * ly conveyed into my pocket, and on coming 
 
 * home, found a little three-corner'd billet, con- 
 
 * taining thefe lines : 
 
 To the charming Mifs Forward. 
 
 «' Moji lovely of your f ex ^ 
 
 *' T HAVE not flept fmce I faw you,— fo 
 
 ^' X deep an impreiBon has your beauty made on 
 
 *' my heart, that 1 find I cannot live without you ; 
 
 •' nor even die in peace, if you vouchafe not my 
 
 «* laft: breath to ifiue at your feet, In pity then to 
 
 «* the fufferings you occafion, grant me a fecond 
 
 ♦* interview, though It be only to kill me with your 
 
 *' frowns, 1 am too much a ftranger in thefe 
 
 ♦* parts to contrive the means ; be, therefore, {(^ 
 
 «* divinely good to do it for me, elfe expert to fee 
 
 ** me carried by your door a bleeding, breath- 
 
 *' lefs corps, —the vi(5lim of your cruelty, inftcad 
 
 ♦< of your compaiTion, to 
 
 ^' Your moft^ grateful adorer, 
 
 <' And evcrlaftirg (lave, 
 
 <« R. WjLDLY." 
 

<#PG# 111>
iVf//^ Betsy Thoughtless. lor 
 
 . • In a poflfcript to this,* purfucd Mifs Forward, 
 
 * he told me, that he would be in the church-porch 
 
 * in the afternoon, hoping to receive my anfwer 
 
 * by the fame means I had diredled him to convey 
 
 * to me the dictates of his heart. 
 
 ' I read this letter over and over, as you nuy 
 
 * eafily guefs, by my remembering the contents tji 
 
 * it (o perfectly ; but it is impolTiblc for me to cx- 
 
 * prefs the perplexity I was in how to reply to it. 
 
 * I do not mean how to excufe myfclt from erant- 
 
 * ing the interview he (b paflionately rcquciltd ; 
 
 * for that, perhaps, I wifhed for with as much im- 
 
 * patience as he could do, but I was diftra^ted at 
 
 * not being able to contrive any pracliciible niethu*i 
 
 * for our meeting. 
 
 * OMifs Betfy, how did I long for you, or fucli 
 
 * a fiicnd as you, to aflift me in this dilemma ! but 
 
 * tlicre was no one pci fun in th.e whde houfe 1 
 
 * dared trufl with fucha fecret : I could not 
 
 * cat a bit of dinner, nor fcaice fpeak a word ta 
 
 * any body ; fo much were my ilioyghts taken up 
 
 * with what I lliould do. 1 was rcfolved to fe« 
 
 * him, and hear what he had lo fay, whatever 
 
 * fhould b« the confcquence ; at laft I hit upon a 
 
 * way, dangerous indeed in every rcfpe^St, and 
 
 * fhameful in a girl of my condition ; vet as there 
 
 * were no other, the frenzy I was polllUsd of, com* 
 
 * pelled me to have rccourfe to it. 
 
 * You niuft remember, my dear Mifs Bcify,' 
 continued fhe, with a deep figh, * the little door 
 
 * at the farther end of the garden, where by 3 our 
 
 * kind contrivance young Sparkifli was introduced : 
 
 * it was at this door I determined to meet Mr. 
 ' Wildly. This you may be furc could not be dune 
 
 * by day, v/ilhout a difcovery, fome one or other 
 
 * beingcontinwally running into the garden. I there- 
 
 * fore fixed the rendezvous at ni^iu, at an hour 
 
 F 3 * when 
 

<#PG# 112>
102 The HISTORY of 
 
 ' when I was pofitivc all the" family would be in 
 
 * bed, and ordered it in this manner: 
 
 ' Chance aided my ill genius in my undoing : I 
 
 * lav at that time alone; Mifs Bab, who ufcd 
 
 ' to be my bed-fellow, was gone home for a fort- 
 ' night, on account of a great wedding in their h- 
 '^ mily, and I thought 1 could cafily flip dov/n ftairs 
 
 * wlien every body was aflccp, and go through the 
 ' kitchen, from whicb you know there is a pafTage 
 ' into the garden. I took no care for any thing 
 ^ but to prevent tre diGippointment of my defign ; 
 ' for I apprehended nothing of ill from a man who 
 ' adv)red me, and of whofe will and acfiions 1 fuol- 
 
 * ifbly imagined I had the fole command. 
 
 * The {Lttling this mstter in my mind cngrofled 
 
 * nil my thoughts, till the bell began to ring for di- 
 ' virie fervice, and 1 had only time to write thcle 
 
 * lines in anfwcr to his billet : 
 
 Tj Mr. Wildly. 
 " Sir, 
 " I HAVE been always told it was highly 
 " A criniinal in a youwg maid, lik^^ me, to iif- 
 ** ten to the addrelfcs of any man without re- 
 *' ceiving the permiflian of her parents for fo 
 '* doing ; yet, I hope, I (liall ftand excufed both 
 " to them and you, if I confefs-1 am willing to bo 
 " thefirft to hear what (o nearly concerns myfelf. 
 ** I have but one way of fpeaking to you, and if 
 " your love be as fiticexe and fervent as you pre« 
 •' tend, you will not think it too much to wait be- 
 ** twecn the hours of eleven and twelve this night, 
 ** at a green door, in the wall which encompafles 
 <' our garden, at the further end of the lane, lead- 
 " ingtothat part of lord **'^'s park, where we 
 *' firft faw each other ; you will find me, if no 
 «' Cfofs accident intervenes, at the time and place I 
 
 Oientioi) j 
 

<#PG# 113>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. io^ 
 ^' mention ; but impute this condefcenfion to no 
 *' other motive than tliat companion you implore. 
 *' I flatter myfelf your intentions are honourable, 
 ^' and in that belief am, 
 
 « Sir, 
 ** Your humble fervant, 
 
 " A. Forward." 
 
 Mifs Bttfy, duiingthe repetition of this letter, 
 and fome time before, fhook. her head, and fncwcd 
 great tokens of furprize and difapprobation, but or- 
 iering no interruption, the other went on in hei* 
 difcourfc in this manner : 
 
 ' 1 protell to you, my dear Mifs Betfy,' fuij ihe, 
 
 * that I had nothing in virw by this letter, and ihu 
 
 * affignation it contameJ, than to fecure him to 
 ' me as a lover. I nevtr had reafon to rcpc.nr of 
 
 * the private correfpondcncc 1 carried on wit!) Mr. 
 ' Spark;{li, nor knew it was in the nature of nun 
 
 * to take advjr,(;igc (.f a maid's fjmplicitvi but \ 
 ' will not protra<fi ihe narrative I pr^.nufed by any 
 
 * ntecilefs particulars. Every thing happened but 
 
 * too fortunately, alas ! a.ccoriiing to my wifli : f 
 
 * ^ound Mr. Wijcjly in the church-porch, g.tvc bin; 
 
 * the fatal billet, unperceiv •! l-y any one: night 
 ' came on, all the family v^cregone to tbcir'rc- 
 
 * pole and I unfcen, unheard, and unfufprcSlcd, 
 
 * quitted my chamber, and taking tho route I tvld 
 you of, opened the garden door, where it ftrtms 
 
 ' the perfoii I expected had waited above half an 
 
 * hour. 
 
 ' His fnft falutations were the mod humbh, and 
 ' withal the moft endearing, that could be. ' My 
 
 * angei,' faid he, *' how heavenly good you are ! 
 «« permit me thus to thank you.* With thefe words 
 
 * he threw himfclf on his knees, and taking one of 
 
 * my hands killed it with the extremeft tendcrnefs. 
 
 * But, oh ! let no younc woman depeixl on the 
 
 F 4 * firfl 
 

<#PG# 114>
104 Thf HISTORY of 
 
 * firft profeflions of her lover ; nor on her own 
 
 * power of keeping him at a proper diflance. 
 
 Here a fudden gufh of tears prevented her, for 
 feme minutes, from profecuting her difcourfe, and 
 JMifsBetfy found herfelf obliged to treat her with 
 more tenderncfs, than in her own mind fhe thought 
 the nature of her cafe deferved. 
 
 CHAP. XIV. 
 
 Concludes Mifs Forward^ s narrative^ and relates 
 forne further particulars tf AJifs Bctfy's behavi" . 
 our.i on hearing a detailfie fo little expelled, 
 
 HO W fweet are the confolations of a finccre 
 friend ! — liow greatly do they alleviate 
 
 the fevered of misfortunes ! Mifs Forward Toon 
 
 dried up hertears, on a foft commiferation fhe faw 
 lluiv excited in Mifs Betfy ; and ftitling, as well as 
 f3ie could, the rifing fighs with which her bcfom 
 heaved, at the remembrance of what fnc was going 
 to relate, refumed her mournful ftory in thefe 
 terms : 
 
 * You may very w< V fuppofe,* Taid (lie, ' that 
 
 * the garden door was not a proper place to enter- 
 
 * tain my lover in : good manners forbad me 
 
 * to ufe him in {q coarfe a manner : befides, late 
 ' as it was, fome paflenger might happen to come 
 
 * that way ; I therefore led him into the arbour, at 
 
 * the end of the terrafs, where we fat down togc 
 
 * ther, on that broad bench under the arch, where 
 
 * you fo often ufed to loll, and call it your throne 
 
 * of ftate. Never was there a finer night : the 
 
 * moon, and her attendant (tars, fhonc with un- 
 ' common brightnefs, the air was all ferene, the 
 ' boifterous winds were all locked in their caverns, 
 
 * and only gentle zephirs, with their fanning wings, 
 
 * wafted 
 

<#PG# 115>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 105 
 
 ' wafted a thoufand odours from the neighbouring 
 
 * plants, perfuming all around. — 'Twas an enchant- 
 
 * ing fcene : nature herfelf feemcd to confpire my 
 
 * ruin, and contributed all in her power to lull my 
 
 * mind into a foft forgetfulnefs of what I owed my- 
 
 * felf,— ~my fame, my fortune, and my 
 
 * family. 
 
 * I w*as beginning to tell him, how fcnfible I 
 
 * was, that to admit him in this manner, was againft 
 
 * all the rules of decency and decorum, ami that 
 
 * I hoped he would not abufe tlie good opinion I 
 
 * had of him, nor entertain the worfc of me for 
 
 * my (o readily complying witli his requcft, and 
 
 * fuch like ftufF: to which he gave little car, and 
 
 * only anfwercd me wilh proicftations of the mod 
 
 * viohjnt pafTion that ever was j fwoicthat I 
 
 * had more charms than my whole (ex bcfides could 
 
 * boaltof; that I was an angel ! — a goddefsj ! 
 
 * that I was nature's v»'holc perfection in one piece; 
 
 * then looking on mc with the mod tender lan- 
 
 * guirtmicntb, he repeated thefe lines in a kind cf 
 
 * txtafy : 
 
 * In forming thee, heav*n took unufual care 5 
 
 * Like its own beauty it defigned thtc fair, 
 
 * And copied from the bed- lov'd angel there. 
 
 * The anfwers I made to ihefe romantic enco- 
 
 * miums were filly enough, I believe, and fuch as 
 
 * encouraged him to think I was too well pJeuiVd 
 
 * to be m.'jch offended at any thing he did. He 
 
 * kilfed,^ — he ch^^pfed me to his bofom, flili filenc- 
 
 * ing my rebukes, hy telling me how handr<)me I 
 
 * was, and how much he loved me 5 and that as 
 
 * opportunities of fpeaking to me were fo difficult 
 
 * to be obtained, 1 mufi: not think him too piefum- 
 
 * ing n he made the moil of this, 
 
 \Vhat could I do?— —how refift his pre/Tures ? 
 ^ The maid having put mc to bed that night, as 
 
 * ulaal, I had no lime to drefs m/ fclf again after 
 
 F 5 * 1 gr»t 
 

<#PG# 116>
To6 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 * I got up, fo was in the moft loofe dilliabille that 
 ' can be imagined. His flrength was far Rjperior 
 
 * to mine ; there was no creature to come to 
 
 * my afTilhiice ; the tune, the place, — 
 
 * all joined to aid his wiihcs, and, with the bitter- 
 
 * eft regret and fhame I r.ow confcfs it, my own 
 
 * fond heart too much conicntcd. 
 
 ' In a word, my dear Mils Bctfy, from one 
 ' liberty he proceeded to another, till at lafl: 
 ' there was nothing left Ibr him to ask, or me 
 
 * to grant.' 
 
 1 he laft words were accompanied with a fecond 
 llood of tears, which flicamcd in fuch abundance 
 down her cheeks, that Mifs Betfy was extremely 
 moved : her gocd-natare made her pity the diftrefs, 
 tho' her virtue and underftanding taught her to de- 
 teft and defpife the ill conduct which occafioned 
 it : (lie wept, and fighed, in concert with heraffli^fled 
 friend, aud omitted nothing that fhe thought might 
 contribute to afFwagc her forrows» 
 
 Mifs Forward was charmed with tliis gencrofity 
 in Mifs Berfy, and compofed herfelf as much as 
 pofiible, to make thofe acknowledgments it merited 
 from her ; and then proceeded to gratify her curio- 
 fity with part of her adventures which yet remain- 
 ed untold. 
 
 ' Whenever I recolle£l,' refumed (he, * how 
 
 flTan.:^e]y, how fuddenly, — • — how almoli 
 
 unfoliicited, I yielded up my honour, fome lines, 
 
 * wriich 1 remember to have read fomewhcrc, 
 come into my mind, and feem, methinks, per- 
 firdiiy adapted to my circumilances. — They are 
 thvfe, 
 
 * Pk-a,s'd with dcftTU(f^ion, proud to be undone, 
 ' With open arms I to my ruin run, 
 
 * And fv)ught the mifchiefs I was bid to fliui 
 Tempted that (liame a virgin ought to dread. 
 And had not the excufc of beuig oetray'd. 
 
 ' Alas \ 
 
 « 
 
 3ne,") 
 m : J 
 

<#PG# 117>
Mifs B^TSY Thoughtless. 107 
 'Alas ! I fee my foIJy now, — — my madnefs, 
 
 * but was blind to it too long. 1 upbraiJcd 
 
 * not my undoer : 1 remonftrated not to Lini 
 
 * any of the ill confequences might pofiibly attend 
 
 * this tranfaflion j nor mentioned one word con- 
 
 * cerning how incumbent it was on him, to fcpiur 
 
 * the injury he had done me by marriage : fuic 
 
 * never was there (o infatuated a wretch ! Morning 
 ' began to break in upon us, and the pangs of bc- 
 
 * ing obliged to part, and the means of mcctinc^ 
 
 * again, now took up all my thoughts. Letiiny; 
 
 * him in at midnight was very daiigerous, as old 
 
 * nurfe Winter, vvho you know is very vapounlTi, 
 
 * often fancies flic hears iioifes in the houfe, .ind 
 
 * lifcs to kc if all the doors and wIjkIows aie fad ; 
 
 * bcfKfes Mr. Wildly told me, it was highly 
 
 * inconvenient for him, being ohlig(*d to make a 
 
 * friend of my lord ***'s porter, to ht up for 
 
 * him. 
 
 * I was almoft at my wit's end, 'till he reco* 
 
 * vered nic by faying, he belicvtd there might be 
 
 * a niore eaiy way for our intercourfe, than this 
 
 * nocturnal rendezvous. ' Oh ! what is that : * 
 
 * ^ied I, carncifly. ' The French woman,' re- 
 
 * plied he, ' that lives here, is good-natured, 
 '' and of a very amorous complexion ; at lead 
 '* Sir John Shuftie, who toyed with her in my 
 •' lord's park, tcils me, flje is fo , but,' continu- 
 " cd he, * I dare take his word ^ he knows your fex 
 *' perfe(Sily, ■j.iu]^ I dare anfwer, if you will gec 
 •' her to go abroad with you, the conaqv^ence will 
 *' be agreeable to us all.' 
 
 *' What,' faid I, ' would you have me make 
 *' her my contiJante?' ' Not altogether fo,' faid 
 " he ; ' at leaft not till you are upv^u cvcii terms 
 •' with her j I mean, tin yuu have fee ret for 
 « fccret.' 
 
 •* How 
 

<#PG# 118>
io8 ^he HISTORY cf 
 
 •* How can that be * demanded I, leave that to 
 *' me/ faid he, * do you only get her out to- 
 •* morrow a walking ; let me knov/ what time 
 
 * you think you can beft do it, and Sir John and 
 •' 1 will meet you as if by chance.' I told him, 
 
 * I would undertake to do it if the weather were 
 
 * fair, and that they might meet us going towards 
 
 * the town, but it muft be paft five, after fhc had 
 ' given her French leiFon to the ladies. This bc- 
 
 * ing agreed upon, we parted, though not without 
 
 * the exiremeft relu6^ance ; at leaft, I am fure on 
 
 * my fide it was fincerely fo. 1 then went back 
 ^* with the fame precaution I had gone out, locked 
 
 * all the doors foftly, and got into my chamber be- 
 
 * fore any of the family were ftirring. 
 
 * I was more than ordinarily civil to mademoi- 
 
 * Telle all the next day : I faid every thing 1 could 
 
 * think on to flatter her, and having got an oppor- 
 
 * tunity of fpeaking to her alone, ' Dear made- 
 
 * moitelle,' faid I, in a wheedling tone, * I have 
 *• a great favour to beg of you/ What is that, 
 •' mifs?' replied fhe, * any thing in my power you 
 
 * may command/ I then told her, I h?.d got a 
 
 * whim in my head for a new tippet, and that I 
 
 * v;anted her fancy in the choice of the colours, 
 ** With all my heart,* faid fne, and when we go 
 ♦' out a walking this evening, wts can call at the 
 *« milliner's, and buy the ribbonJs/ ' That will 
 *' not do/ cried I, ' I would not have any of the 
 *' ladies know any thing of the matter, 'till I have 
 " made it and got it on ; fo no-body mufl go with 
 
 * us/ Well, well,' anfwered fhe, ' it ihall be 
 
 * fj ; but I muft tell the govcrntfs. 1 know fhe 
 
 *' will not be againll humouring you io fuch a lit- 
 *« tie fancy, and will fend the other tutorefs, or 
 *• nurfe Winier, to wait upon the other ladies/ 
 
 * I told her flic was very good, but enjoined her to 
 
 * beg the govQrnefi to keep it a fccret j for my 
 
 * tippet 
 

<#PG# 119>
A///} Betsy Thoughtless. 109 
 
 * tippet would be mighty pretty, and I wanted to 
 
 * furprife them with the fight of it/ 
 
 ' The governefs, however, was fo kind as to let 
 
 * us go fomcwhat before the time we exped^ed, in 
 
 * order to prevent any one from offering to accom- 
 
 * pany us j but early as it was, the two gentlemen 
 *■ were on the road. They accofted us with a great 
 « deal of complaifance : ' What ! my Diana of 
 *' the foreft !' faid Sir John, to mademoifelle, * am 
 ** I fo fortunate to fee yoj once again ?' What 
 
 * reply ftie made I do not know, being fpeaking to 
 
 * Wildly at the fame time ; but he alfo, by my 
 
 * inftigations, made his chief court to mademoi- 
 
 * fcllc, and both of them joined to intreat fhe would 
 
 * permit them to IcaJ her to fome houfe of enter- 
 
 * tainmcnt : her refufals were very faint, and per- 
 
 * ceiving, by my looks, that I was not very averfe, 
 *' Whatfhall we do, mifs ?' faid (he to me, * there 
 ** is no getting rid of thefe men. Shall we venture 
 
 *' to go to them ? 'Tis but a frolic' ' I am 
 
 ' under your diredlion, madamoifelle ; but I fee 
 *' no harm in it, as to be fure,* replied I, ' they 
 " are gentlemen of honour.' 
 
 ' In fine, we went into the firft houfe that had 
 
 * the profpe£l of affording us an agreeable recepti- 
 
 * on. It is not to be doubted but we were treated 
 ' with the beft the place we were in could fupply ; 
 
 * Sir John declared the moft flaming paflion for ma- 
 
 * demoifelie, and engrofled her fo much to himfclf, 
 
 * that Wildly had the liberty of addrefTing me, 
 
 * without letting her fee his choice gave me the pre- 
 
 * fere nee. 
 
 ' Sir John after ufing mademoifelle with fome 
 
 * freedoms, wiiich I could perceive (he did not 
 
 * greatly refent, told her, there was an exceeding 
 
 * fine pi(flure in the next room, and afked her to 
 
 * go and look upon it. ' Oh ! yes,' replied fhe, 
 *' I am extravagantly fond of painting. Are not 
 
 ^ *' you, 
 

<#PG# 120>
no Ti^^ H I S TOR Y ^/ 
 
 *' you, Mifsr' continued (he tome, with a carc- 
 
 * lefs air. ' No/ faid I, ' I had rather flay here, 
 " and look out of the window ; but I would not 
 ** hinder this gentleman,' meaning Mr. Wildly : 
 ' who replied, ' I have feen it already, (o Will ftay 
 •' and keep you company.' 
 
 ' I believe, indeed, we might have fpared our- 
 ' fclves the trouble of thefe lall fpeeches ; for our 
 
 * companions fecmed as little to expcd as todefire 
 
 * we fhould follow thepi, but ran laughing, jump- 
 
 * ing, and fkipping out of the room, utterly re- 
 
 * gardlefs of thofe they left behind. 
 
 * Thus you fee, my dear Mifs Betfy, continued 
 
 * file, Wildly had, a fecond time, the opportuni- 
 
 * ty of triumphing over the weaknefs of your un- 
 ' happy friend. Oh / had it been the iafl, per- 
 
 * haps I had not been the wretch I am ; but, alas ! 
 ' my folly ceafed not here : I loved, -and every 
 
 * inierview made him ftill dearer to me* 
 
 ^ On mademoifelle's return, we began to talk 
 
 * of going home : ' Blefs me, cried I, ''tis now 
 '' too late to go into town. What excufe fhall 
 *' we make to thegovernefs, for not having bought 
 " the ribbonds ?' * I have already contrived that,* 
 
 * replied file, ' I will tell her, that the woman had 
 *' none but ugly old fafiiioned things, and expeds 
 *' a freih paicel from London in two or three 
 '• d'ivs.' ' O that is rare,' cried I, * that will be 
 " a charming pretence for our coming out again.' 
 " And a charming opportunity for our meeting you 
 " again,' ' faid Sir John Shuffia. ' If you have 
 *^' any inclination to lay hold of it,' rejoined ma- 
 ' demoifelle. ' Aiid you have courage to ven- 
 " ture,' cried he, ' You fee we are no cowards,* 
 " anfvvered llie brifkly. Well, then, name your 
 '* day,' laid Wildly, ' if Sir J.:hn accepts the 
 *' challenge, I will be his f.cond ; but I am afraid 
 *' it cannot be 'dli after Thurfd ay, becaufe my lord 
 
 *•' talks 
 

<#PG# 121>
M^ Betsy Thoughtless. m 
 
 ' talks of going to ***, and we cannot be back 
 
 » in lefs than three days.' 
 ' Friday therefore was the day agreed upon, and 
 we all four were pundual to the appointment. 
 I (hall not trouble you with the particulars of our 
 converfation in this or any other of the meetings 
 wc had altogether, only tell you, that by the 
 contrivance of one or other of us, we found 
 means of comi.ng together once or twice eve- 
 ry week, during the whole time thefe gentle- 
 men flayed in the country, which was upwards of 
 two months. 
 
 * On taking leave, I prefled Wildly to write to 
 me under cover to mademoifclle Grenouille, 
 which he promifed to do, and I was filly enough 
 to expecft. Many pofts arriving without bringing 
 any letter, I was fadly difappointed, and could 
 not forbear cxprcfling my concern to mademoi- 
 felle, who only laughed at me, and tcjd mc, I 
 as yet knew nothing of tlie world, nor the tem- 
 per of mankind ; that a tranfient acquain- 
 tance, fuch as ours had been with thefe gentle- 
 men, ought to be forgot as foen as over ; — 
 that there was no great probability we fliould ever 
 fee one another again, and it would be only a fol- 
 ly to keep up a correfpondtr.ee by letters j • 
 and added, that by this time they were, do^ibtlt'Ts, 
 entered into other engagements ; and fo n~iight v/e 
 too, faid file, if the place and fafliiun v/e live in 
 did not prevent us. 
 
 ' I found by this, and fonic other fpecches of 
 the like nature, that it v>'as the fex, not the per- 
 fon, file regarded. 1 could not, however, be 
 of her way of thinking. I really loved Mr. 
 Wildly, and v/ould have given the worlds had 1 
 be^n mifircfs of it, to have ken \im again ; but, 
 as Ihc faid, indeed, there was no probabili y for 
 my doing f o ^ and therefore I attempted, ihrouoh 
 

<#PG# 122>
112 n^ HISTORY of 
 
 * her perfuafions, to make a virtue of neccflity, 
 
 * and forget both him and all had pafs'd between 
 « us. I Ihould in the end, perhaps, have accom- 
 
 * pliilied this point ; but oh ! 1 had a remembran- 
 
 * cer within, which I did not prefently know of. 
 
 * Jn fine, 1 had but too much reafon to believe I was 
 
 * pregnant. — A thing, which though a natural con- 
 
 * fequence of the folly I had been guilty of, never 
 
 * once entered into my head. 
 
 ' Madamoifelle Grenouille feemed now terribly 
 
 * alarmed, on my communicating to her my fuf- 
 
 * picions on this fcore : (he cried, 'twas very un- 
 
 * lucky ! then paufcd, and asked what I would 
 
 * do, if it (hould really be as I feared ? I replied, 
 
 * that I knew not what courfc to take, for if my 
 ' father fhould know it I was utterly undone : 
 ' I added, that he was a very auftere man ; and, 
 ' befidcs, I had a mother-in-law, who would not 
 ' fail to fay every thing {he could to incenfe him 
 
 * againft me. 
 
 "• 1 fee no recourfe you have then,' faid fhe, 
 *'• but by taking phyfic to caufe an abortion. 
 •' You muft pretend you are a little difordered, 
 *' and fend for an apothecary. The fooner the 
 «* better, for if it {hould become vifible, all would 
 *' infarut)ly be known, and we fliould both be 
 " ruined.' 
 
 * I was not fo weak as not to fee, that if any 
 
 * difcovery were made, her fhare in the intrigue 
 
 * muil come out, and (he would be diredly turn- 
 ' cd out of doors ; and that whatever concern (lie 
 ' pretended for me, it was chiefly on her own ac- 
 ' count : however, as 1 faw no other remedy, was 
 
 * refolvcd to take her advice. 
 
 * Thus by having been guilty of one crime I 
 
 * was eafnared to commit another, of a yet fouler 
 
 * kind : one was the error of nature, this an of- 
 
 * fenc<; againft nature. The black dcfign, how- 
 
 * ever. 
 

<#PG# 123>
Mtfi Betsy Thoughtless. 113 
 
 * ever, fucceeded not ; I took potion after po* 
 
 * tion, yet (till retained the token of my (hame, 
 
 * which at length hecame too perfpicuous for me, 
 
 * to hope it would not be taken notice of by all 
 
 * who faw me. 
 
 * I was almoft diftradled, and madamoifellc 
 
 * Grenouille little lefs fo : I was one day alone 
 
 * in my chamber, pondering on my wretched ftate, 
 
 * and venting fome part of the anguifn of my mind 
 
 * in tears, when (he came in: ' What avails all 
 *' this whimpering, faid fhe, ' you but hailcn 
 *' what you would wifti to avoid. The governcfs 
 *' already perceives you are llrangely altered ; fhe 
 *' thinks you are either in a bad liate of health, 
 •' or fome way difordered in your mind, and 
 ** talks of writing to your father to fend for you 
 ** home." 
 
 " O heavens ! ' cried I, ' Home did you 
 ** fay ? ■ No ; I will never go home. The 
 *' grave is not fo hateful to me, n<jr death fo terri- 
 *' ble as my father's prefcnce.' I pi'y you from 
 *' mv foul,' faid (he, but what can you do ? There 
 " will be no flaying for you here, after your con- 
 *^ dition is once known, and it cannot be conceal- 
 " ed much longer.' Thefe words, the truth of 
 ' which I was very well convinced of, drove me 
 *- into the laft difpair : I raved, 1 tore my hair, 
 
 * -I fwore to poifon, drown, or ftabm}fclf, 
 
 * rather than live to have my fliame expofed to the 
 
 * feverity of my father, and reproaches of my kin- 
 
 * dred. 
 
 " Come, come,' refumed ihe, ' there Is no 
 ** need of fuch defperate remedies^ you had better 
 *' go to London, and have recourfe to Wildly ; 
 *' who knows, as you arc a gentleman*s daughter, 
 *' and will have a fortune, but you may per- 
 ** fuade him to marry you ? if not, you can o- 
 
 * blige him to take care of you in your lying in, 
 
 " and 
 

<#PG# 124>
114 "The HISTORY of^ 
 *' and to keep the child : and when you are once 
 '' got rid of your burthen, Ibme excufc or other 
 *' may be found for your elopement.* 
 
 " But how fliall I get to London ?' refumed I, 
 *' how find out my undoer in a place I know no- 
 *' thing of, nor ever have. been at? Of whom 
 '' (liall I enquire r I am ignorant of what family 
 '* he is, or even where he lives.' ' As to that,' 
 ' replied (lie, ' I will undertake to inform myfelf 
 '• of every thing neceflary for you to know, and 
 '* if you refolve to go I will fet about it directly.' 
 ' I then told her, I would do any thing, rather 
 
 * than be expofed ; on which fhe bid me afiumc 
 ' as chearfui a countenance as 1 could, and depend 
 ' on her btinging me fome intelligence of VVildlj 
 
 * before I flepc. 
 ' llie method fhe took to make good her pro- 
 
 mife, was, it feems, to fend a perfon whom flie 
 could confide in to the feat of lord ***, to en- 
 quire among the fervants where Mr. Wildly, 
 who had lately been a gueft there, might be 
 found. She told me, that the anfvver they gave 
 the man was, that they knew not where he lodg- 
 ed, but that he might be heard of at any of the 
 coffee hoiWes about St. James's. As I was alto- 
 
 * gether a ilranger in Lodon, this information gave 
 me but little fatisfad^ion j but madamoifclle Grc- 
 nouille, whofe intereft it was to hurry me away, 
 
 * affured me that file knew that part of the town 
 perfeclly well, having lived there fcvcral months 
 on her firli arrival In England; — —that there 
 were feverul great coffee- houfcs there, frequent- 
 ed by all the gentlemen of falliion, and that no- 
 thing would be more eafy than to find Mr, 
 Wildly at one or ether of them. My heart, 
 however, (huddered at the thoughts of this enter- 
 prize, yet her pcrfwafions, joined to the terrors 
 
 ' I was in of being expofed, and' the certainty 
 
 ' that 
 

<#PG# 125>
M'^fs Betsy Thoughtless. 115 
 
 * that a difcovery of my condition was inevitable, 
 ' made me refolve to undertake it. 
 
 ' Nothing now remained but the means how I 
 
 * fhould get away, To as to avoid the purfuit 
 
 * might, doubtlefs, be made after me ; which 
 ' after fome confultation was thus contrived, and 
 
 * executed. 
 
 ' A fl} ifig coach fets out from H— ~ every 
 
 * Monday at two o' Clock in the morn in 7 ; ma- 
 ' damcifelle Grenouille engaged the fame man, 
 
 * who had enquired at lord *^*'s for Mr. Wildly, 
 to fecure a place for nhe in it. The Sunday be- 
 fore I was, to go I pretended indifpofition to a- 
 void going to church : I pafied that time in pack- 
 ing up the beft of my things in a large bundle ; 
 for I had no opportunity of taking a box or trur.k 
 with 'me. My greateft difficulty was how to get 
 
 * out of bed from Mifs Bab, who flill lay with 
 ' me. I thought, however, that if (he happened 
 
 * to awake while I w?«s rifmg, i v^ould tcJl her I 
 
 * was not vtry well, and was only going into the 
 
 * next room, to open the window for a little air; 
 ' but I ftood in no need of this precaution, flic 
 ' was in a found flecp, and I left my bed, put on 
 ' the cloaths I was to travel in, took up my bun- 
 
 * die, and ftole out of the room, without her 
 ' perceiving any thing of the matter. 1 went out 
 
 by the fame way by which I had fulfilled my 
 firft fatal appointment with Mr. Wildly ; at a 
 little diftance from the garden-door, I found 
 the friend of madamoifclle Grenouille, who wait- 
 ed for me with a horfc and pillion ; he took my 
 bundle before, and me behind him, and then we 
 
 * made the beft of our wav towards H , 
 
 where we arrived time enough for the coach. I 
 alighted at the door of the inn, and he rode off 
 dire6^1y to avoid being feen by any body, who 
 
 * miglit 
 

<#PG# 126>
ii6 ne HISTORY of 
 
 * might dcfcribe him, in cafe an enquiry (hould be 
 
 * made. 
 
 ■' I will not trouble you with the particulars- of 
 
 * my journey, nor how I was amazed on enter- 
 
 * ing this great metropolis ; I fhall only tell you, 
 
 * that it being dark when we came in, I lay that 
 ' night at the inn, and the nexc morning, follow- 
 
 * ing the directions madamoifelle Grenouille had 
 
 * given me, took a hackney coach, and ordered 
 ' the man to drive into any of the ftreets about St, 
 ' James's, and (lop at the firft hoofe where he 
 
 * ihould fee a bill upon the door for ready fur- 
 •-" njfhed lodgings. It happened to be in Rider^ 
 *" flreet ; the woman at firft Teemed a little fcrup- 
 
 * ious of taking me, as I was a flranger, and had 
 ' no recommendation ; but, on my telling her I 
 
 * would pay her a forinii^ht beforehand, weagrecfll 
 
 * at the rate of twelve fliillings a week. 
 
 ' The nrft thing I did was to fend a porter to 
 
 * the cofFee-houfes, whrrehe eafily heard of him^ 
 
 * but brought me the vexatious intelligence that he 
 *■ was gone to Tunbridge, and it was not knowa 
 
 * when he would return. This was a very great 
 ' misfortune to me, and the more fo as 1 had 
 
 * very little money : I thought it beft, however, 
 ' to follow him thither, which I did the fame 
 
 * week. 
 
 ' But, oil ! my dear Mlfs Betfy, how unlucky 
 
 * every thing happened ? he had left that place the 
 
 * very morning before I arrived, and was gone for 
 
 * London. I had nothing now to do but return ; 
 ^ but was 'io difordered with the fatigues I had un- 
 
 * dergonc, that I was obliged to ftay four days tm 
 
 * compofe my felf. When I came back I fe^t 
 
 * immediately to the coffee-houfe ; but how (ball 
 
 * I exprefs the diftradion I was in, when I wat 
 
 * told he had lain but one night in town, and was 
 
 * gone to Bath. 
 
 < Thi» 
 

<#PG# 127>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 117 
 
 * This fccond difappointment was terrible in- 
 
 * deed : I had but half-a- crown remaining of the 
 
 * little flock I brought from the boarding-fchool, 
 
 * and had no way to procure a fupply, but by fel- 
 
 * ling my watch ; which I did to agold-fmith ia 
 ^ the neighbourhood, for what he was pleafed to 
 
 * give me, and then fet out for Bath by the firft 
 ^ coach. 
 
 * Here I had the g^ood fortune to meet him ; 
 
 * he was ftrangcly furprifed at the fight of me in 
 
 * that place, but much more fo when 1 told him» 
 
 * what had brought me there : he Teemed extreme- 
 
 * ly concerned at the accident. But when I mcn- 
 
 * tioned marriage, he plainly told me, I mull not 
 
 * think of fuchathing: that he was not in cir- 
 
 * cumflances to fupport a family ;— that having 
 
 * loft the fmall fortune, left him by his friends, 
 
 * at play, he was obliged to have recourfc, for l>is 
 
 * prefent fubfiftence, to the very means by which 
 ' he had been undone : In fhort, that he was a 
 
 * gamefter. The name flarlled me: treated, as I 
 
 * had always heard it, with the utmoft contempt, 
 
 * I could not reconcile how fuch a one came to be 
 
 * the gucft and companion of a lord, though I 
 
 * have fmce heard, that men of that profcilion frQ- 
 
 * quently receive thofe favours from the nobility, 
 
 * which are denied to perfons of more unblemifh- 
 
 * ed chara£ler. 
 
 ' Wildly, however, it is certain, has feme no- 
 
 * tions of honour and gocd-nature j he afiured me 
 
 * he would do all in his power to protc6l m.e ; but 
 
 * added, that he had been very unfortunate of late, 
 ' and that I muft wait for a lucky chance, before 
 
 * he could afFord me any fupply. 
 
 * I flayed at Bath all the tim.e he was there : he 
 
 * vifited me every day, but I lived on my own 
 
 * money, 'till we came to town, v/hen my time 
 ' being very near, he brought me 10 the place you 
 
 ' iand 
 

<#PG# 128>
iiB r;^^ H ISTO R Y of 
 
 find me in, having, it fcems, agreed with the 
 woman of the houfc for a certain fum of money 
 to iupport me during my lying-in, and keep the 
 child as long as it (hould live. The mifcries I 
 have fuftained during my abode with this old hag, 
 would be too tedious to repeat. The only joy I 
 have is, that the wretched infant died in three 
 days after its birth, fo has efcaped the woes, 
 which children thus expofed are doomed to bear. 
 Wildly has taken his laft leave of me, and I have 
 wrote to an aunt, entreating her to endeavour 
 to obtain my father's forgivenefs. I pretended 
 
 to her, that I left L e for no other reafon 
 
 than becaufe I had an ardent defire to fee L^on- 
 don ; and, as I think, no-body can reveal to him 
 the true caufe, have fome hopes of not being ut^ 
 terly abandoned by him/ 
 
 Here this unfortunate creature finiflied her long 
 narrative, and Mifs Betfy faw her in too much af- 
 fiidion, to cxprefs any thing that might encreafe It : 
 ilie only thanked her for repofing a confidence in 
 her, " Which," faid flie, "' may be of great fer- 
 " vice to me fome time or other.'* 
 
 Before they parted, Mifs Forward fiiid, (he had 
 gone in debt to Mrs. Nightfliade, for fome few 
 things (lie wanted, over and above what is gene- 
 gcrally allowed in fuch cafes, and had been affronted 
 by her fur not being able to difcharge it, therefore 
 entreated Mifs Betf;/ to lend her tv/enty (hillings ; 
 on v'hich the generous, and fweet-tempered young 
 lady immediately drew her purfe, and after giving 
 her the fum file demanded, put two guineas more 
 into her hand : "Be pleafed to accept this," faid 
 (he, *^ you may p^fTibly want fomething after hav- 
 *' ing paid your debt." The other tlianked her, 
 and told her, fl-^e doubted not but her aunt would 
 fend her fomething, and ihe would then repay it. 
 •' 1 fnall g.ve aiyfelf no pain about that," faid 
 
 Mifs 
 

<#PG# 129>
M/j Betsy Thoughtless. 119 
 Mifs Betfy, and then took her leave, dcfiring {he 
 would lee her know by a letter what fuccefs (lie had 
 with her friends. Mifs Forward told her, (he 
 might depend not only on hearing from her, but 
 facing her again, as foon as ihe had any thing to ac- 
 quaint her with. 
 
 CHAP. XV. 
 
 Brhgs many things on the carpet^ highly pUafing to 
 Mifs Betfyy in their beginnings and no Ufs per^ 
 plexing to her in their confequences, 
 
 TH E account of thofe many and dreadful mif- 
 fortuncs, which the ill condu6t of Mifs For- 
 ward had drawn upon her, made Mif«^ Bctfy ex- 
 tremely penfive. ' 'Tis firange,* faid fhe to her- 
 felf, ' that a woman cannot indulge hcrfelf in the 
 
 * liberty of converfmg freely with a man, without 
 
 * being perfuaded by him to do e- ery thing he 
 ' would have her.* She thought, however, that 
 fome excufe might be made for l^.'li^s Forward, on 
 the fcore of her being (o ftridly debarred from all 
 acquaintance with the other fex. ' People,' cried 
 ihe, ' have naturally an inclination to do what 
 ' they are mod forbid. The poor girl had a curi- 
 ' ofity to hearjierfelf addrefTed, and having no op- 
 
 * portunity of gratifying that pafTion, but by ad- 
 ' mitting her lover at fo odd a time and place, was 
 ' indeed too much in his power to have withftocd 
 ' her ruin, even if fhe had been miftrefs of more 
 
 * courage and refolution than fhe was.' 
 
 On meditatiiig on the follies which women are 
 fometimes prevailed upon to be guilty of, the difco- 
 very fhe had made of Mifs Flora's intrigue with 
 Gayland cam* frcfh into her mind. ' What, faid 
 flie, ' could induce her to faciifice her honour ? 
 
 ' Deciaiaticiis 
 

<#PG# 130>
120 7/^^ H I STOR Y of 
 
 * Declarations of love were not new to her. She 
 
 * heard every day the flatteries with which our fex 
 
 * are treated by the men, and needed not to have 
 
 * purchafed the afliduides of any one of them at fo 
 
 * dear a rate. Good God ! are innocence and the 
 
 * pride of confcious virtue, things of fo little efti- 
 
 * mation, as to he thrown away for the trifling 
 
 * pleafure of hearing a feW tender proteftations ? 
 
 * Perhaps all falfe, and uttered by one whofe heart 
 
 * dcfpifes the eafy fondnefs he has triumphed over, 
 
 * and ridicules the very grant of what he fo earneft" 
 « Jyfollicitedi' 
 
 It is certain, this young lady had the highcft no- 
 tions of honour and virtue, and whenever fhe gave 
 herfelf time to refle(5l, looked on every thing that 
 had a tendency to make an encroachment on them 
 with the moft extreme deteftation ; yet had flie 
 good-nature enough to pity thofe faults in others, 
 ihe thought it impoflible for her to be once guilty of 
 herfelf. 
 
 But amidfl: fentiments as noble, and as generous, 
 ns ever heart was poflefl^ed of, vanity, that foible of 
 her foul, crept in, and would have itsfhare. She 
 had never been thoroughly attacked in a difhonour- 
 able way, but by Gayland, and the gentleman- 
 commoner at Oxford ; both which fhe rebuffed 
 with a becoming difdain. In this (he fecretly exul- 
 ted, and had that dependance on her power of re- 
 pelling all the efforts, come they in what fhape fo- 
 ever, that fliould be made againft her virtue, that 
 fhe thought it beneath her to behave fo as not to be 
 in danger of incurring them. 
 
 How great a pity it is, that a mind endued with 
 fo many excellent qualities, and which had fuch ex- 
 alted ideas of v/hat is truly valuable in woman kind> 
 lliould be tainted with a frailty of fo fatal a nature, 
 as to expofe her to temptations, which if file were 
 not utterly undone, it muft be owing rather to the 
 
 interpcfitioii 
 

<#PG# 131>
AZ/y} Be TSY Thoughtless. 121 
 
 interpofition of her guardian angel, than to the 
 Itrength of human reafon : but of that hereafter ; 
 at prefent there were none had any bafe defigiiS up- 
 on her ; we muft fhew what fuccefs thofe gentle- 
 men met with, who addreffed her with the moft 
 pure and honourable intentions : cf this number wc 
 fhall fpeak fir (I of Mr. True worth and Mr. Staple ; 
 the one, as has been already faid, flrenuoufly re- 
 commended by her brother, the other by Mr, 
 Goodman. . . 
 
 Mr. Staple had the good fortune (if it. may be 
 called fo) to be thefirftof thcfe tv/oVvh6 had the 
 opportunity of declaring his paffion : the journe? 
 of the other to London having been retarded two 
 days longer than he intended. 
 
 This gentleman having Mr. Goodman's leave, 
 made a fccond vifit at his houfc. Lady Mcliaf!:! 
 and Mils Flora knowing on what bufincfs he was 
 come, made an excufe for leaving him and Mifs 
 Betfy together. He made his addrefTes to her, in 
 the forms which lovers ufually obferve on the flrft 
 declaration ; and file replied to what he faid, in a 
 manner not to encourage iijm' too much, nor yet to 
 take from him all hope. ^' ' /•- " '• 
 
 While they were difcourfing a'footrftan came In, 
 and told her, a gentleman from Oxford delircd to 
 fpeak with her, having fome commands from her 
 .brother to deliver to her. Mr. Staple fuppofing they 
 had bufinefs took his leave, and Mr. IVucworth, 
 for it was he indeed, was introduced. 
 
 *' Madam," faid he, faluting her with the ut- 
 mnft refpc<5f, '.' I have many obligations to Mr. 
 ** T'houghtlefs j but none which demands fo hr^c 
 " a portion of my gratitude, as the honour, he has 
 f conferred upon me in prcfcnting you with this 
 *« letter." To which (he replied, that her brother 
 mi'(t certainly have a great confidence in his good- 
 iiefs, to give him this trouble ; with thcfe wcrdi 
 
 Vol. J. G fee 
 

<#PG# 132>
122 The H 1 S T O R Y c/ 
 
 ihe took the letter out of his hand, and having; ob- 
 liged him to feat himfelfj *' You will pardon, Sir,'* 
 jiaid fhe, " the rudenefs, which my impatience to 
 ^* receive the commands of fonear and dear a rela- 
 ** tion makes me guilty of." He made no other 
 anfwer to thefe words than a low bow, and fhe 
 withdrew to a window, and found the contents of 
 hcT brother's letter were thtfc : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 * My dear fijler^ 
 
 * y SHALL leave Oxford to-morrow, in order 
 
 * Jl to crofs the country for the feat of Sir Ralph 
 ' Trufty, as I fuppofc Mr. Goodman will inform 
 
 * you, 1 having wrote to him by the poft j but the 
 
 * moft valuable of my friends being going to Lon- 
 
 * don, and exprefling a defire of renewing that ac- 
 
 * quaintancc he bad begun to commence wMth you 
 
 * here, I have taken the liberty of troubling him 
 
 * with the delivery of this to you. He is a gentle- 
 
 * man whofe merits you are yet a flranger to, but 
 
 * I have fo good an opinion of your penetration, as 
 
 * to be confident a very little time will convince 
 
 * you, that he is deferving all the efteem in your 
 ^ power to regard him with : in the mean time 
 
 * doubt not, but you will receive him as a perfon 
 ' whofe fuccefs, in every thing, is much defired 
 ^ by him, who is, 
 
 * With the tendered: good wifhes, 
 
 < Dear fifter, 
 
 * Your moft affedlionate brother, 
 
 * F. Thoughtless.* 
 
 As (he did not doubt but, by the flile and manner 
 of tliib letter, that it had been feen by Mr. True- 
 worth, fhe could not keep herfelf from blufliing, 
 which hcobfeivingas he fat, flattered himfelf with 
 
 taking 
 

<#PG# 133>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 123 
 
 tftking as a good omen. He had too much awe up- 
 on him, however, to make any declaration of iiis 
 paflion at firft viiit, neither, indeed, had he the op- 
 portunity of doing it, lady Mellafin, and Mifs P^io- 
 ra, thinking they had left Mr. Staple and MifsBctf/ 
 a fufiicient time together, came into the room : 
 the former was furprifed to find he was gone, aiid a 
 ftrange gentleman in his place ; but Mifs Flora re- 
 membering him perfectly well, they f^lutcd each 
 other with the freedom of perfons who were not 
 entire ftrangers, they entered into a converfation, 
 and other company coming in, Mr. Trueworth 
 had an opportunity of difplaying the fine talents he 
 was mafter of: his travels, — the obfcrvations he had 
 made on thccuriofities he had feen abroad, particu- 
 Jarly at Rome, Florence, and Naples, were highly 
 entertaining to the company ; on taking leave he 
 told the ladies, he hoped they would allov/ him the 
 favour of maicingoncat their tea-table fometimcs, 
 while he remained in London : to v.'hich lady Mel- 
 hfm and her daughter, little fufpe6ling the motive 
 he had for this requeft, joined in affurinp; him, he 
 could not come too often, and that they (l^.culd ex- 
 pect to fee him every d«y ; but Mifs Betfy looking 
 on herfelf as chiefly concerned in his admifTion, mo- 
 deftly added to what they had faid, only that a per- 
 fonfo much, and fhe doubted net but fo jullly, cf- 
 teemed by her brother, might be certain of a fincerc 
 welcome from her. 
 
 Every body was full of the praifes of this gen- 
 tleman, and Mifs Betfy, though (he faid the Icafl 
 of any one, thought her brother had not beflowcd 
 more on him, than he really deferved. Mr. Good- 
 man ccmlr.g hame foon after, there appeared fomc 
 marks of difpleafure in his countenance, which, as 
 he was the beft humoured man in the World, vay 
 much furprifed thofe of his family ; but the com- 
 ,papy not being" all retired, none of them feeiT»ed 
 , G 2 :• 
 
 i 
 

<#PG# 134>
12:^ fhc II I S TO R Y cf 
 
 to take anv notice of it, and went on wich tlie con* 
 vcrfation they were upon before lus entrance. 
 
 I'hc vifitors, however, were no fooner gone, 
 than without flaying to be afked, he immediately 
 let them into the occafion of his being fo much 
 fumcd : '' Mifs Betfy," faid he, '^ you have 
 " ufcu me very ill : I did not think you would 
 " have made a fool of me in the manner ycu have 
 '* dor,zr Blefs me, Sir," cried fhe, " in what 
 *' have 1 offended r" " You have not only offended 
 " £gaii (I me/' anfwered he, very haftily, " but 
 '* alfo againfl your own reafon, and common un- 
 " derftanding : you are young, 'tis true, yet not 
 " io young as not to know it is both ungenerous 
 *' and fiily toimpofe upon your friends." '' I fcorn 
 " the thought, Sir, of impofrng upon any body," 
 faid (he; *' I therefore defire, Sir, you will tell 
 *l me what you mean by fo-unjuft an accufation." 
 ^' Unjuft !" refumed he, " I appeal to the whole 
 '• world, if it were well done of you to fuffer me 
 " to encourage my friend's courtfhip to you, when 
 *^' at the fanie time your brother had engaged you 
 >' to receive the addreffcs of another." 
 
 iVlifs Betfy, though hx from thinking it a fault 
 in her to hear the prcpofals of a hundred lovers, 
 ^ud as many offered themfelves, was yet a little 
 ihocked at the reprimand given her by Mr. Good- 
 man ; and not being able prefently to make any 
 reply to what he had faid, he took a letter he had 
 iuft received frc>*ii her brother out of his pocket, 
 iind threw it on the table, with thcfe v/ords : '^ Th:t 
 *t will fhev/," faid he, " v/hether I have not caufe 
 " to relent your behaviour in this point." Per- 
 ceiving fhe was about to take it up, " Hold," 
 cried he, '' my v;ife Oiall read it, and be the judge 
 " between us." 
 Lady Meliafin, who had ;jot fpokc ail this time, 
 . ^ then 
 

<#PG# 135>
M//(f Betsy Thought LESS. 125 
 
 then took the letter, and read aloud the contents, 
 which were thefe : 
 
 To Mr. Goodman. 
 Sir, 
 
 THIS comes to let you know I have received 
 the remittances you were (o obliging to 
 fend me. I think to fet out to-morrow for 
 
 L e, but (hall not ftay there for any length 
 
 of time : my intentions for going into the army 
 are the fame as when I laft wrote to you, and 
 the more I conficltrr on that affair, the more I am 
 confirmed that a military life is moft fuitable ot 
 any to my genius and humour : if, therefore, 
 you can liear of any thing proper for me, eithei 
 in the guards, or in a marching regiment, ngainfl: 
 I come to town, I fhali be infinitely thankhil for 
 the trouble you take in tlie enquiry ; but, Sir, 
 this is not all the favour I have to afk of you at 
 prcfcnt. A gentleman of family, foitune, and 
 charackr, has feen my fifter, likes her, and ii 
 %oing to Lon^ion, on no other bufmefs than to 
 make his addreiTes to her. I have already wrote 
 to her on this fubjec^, and I believe (lie will pay 
 fom.e regard to what I have faid ir) his bclulf. I 
 am very well afilired (he never can have a more 
 advantageous offer, as to his circumflanccs, 
 nor be united to a man of more true honour, 
 morality, and fweetnefs of difpofuioh ; ail Vv-hich 
 I have had frequent occafions of being an eye* 
 witnefs of : but fhe is young, gay, and as yet, 
 perhaps, not altogether fo capable as I could wifii 
 of knowing what will make for her real happi- 
 nefs ; I therefore intreat you, Sir, as the long 
 experienced friend of our family, to forward this 
 match, both by your advice, and whatever elfe 
 is in your power, w^hich certainly will be the 
 greateft act of goodnefs you can confer on her, 
 63 ^ ms 
 

<#PG# 136>
126 The HISTORY of 
 
 as well as the highcfl: obligation to a brother, who 
 vvilhcs nothing more than to fee her fecured fron-> 
 ' all temptations, and well fettled in the world. I 
 ' am, 
 
 * With the greateft refpedl, 
 
 ' Sir, 
 ' Your moft humble, 
 
 ' And moft obedient fervant, 
 
 ' F. Thoughtless/ 
 
 ' P. S. I had forgot to inform you, Sir, that the 
 
 * name of the gentleman, I take the liberty of 
 ' recommending with fomuch warmth, is True- 
 
 * worth ; that he is defcendcd from the ancient 
 ' Britons by the iather's fide, and by the mother's 
 
 * from the honourable and well known OlJciif- 
 ' tie's, in Kent.' 
 
 «* O, fye Mifs Betfy," faid Lady Mellafin, 
 ** how could you ferve Mr. Goodman fo ? VVhat 
 '' will Mr. Staple hy., when he comes to knov/ he 
 *' was encouraged to court a woman that was a\ 
 *' ready pre-engaged." *' Pre-engaged, Madam,"' 
 cried Mifs Betfy, in a fcornful tone, " what to a 
 *' man I never faw but three times in my whole 
 " life, and whofe mouth never uttered a fyllabie 
 *' of love to me." She was going on, but Mr. 
 Goodman, v/ho was ftillin a great heat, interrupted 
 her, faying, " No matter whether he has uttered 
 ■*' any thing of the bufmefs or not, it feems you are 
 '*' enough acquainted with his fentiments, and I 
 ■*' doubt not but he knows you are, or he would 
 *• not have taken a journey to London on your ac- 
 *' count. You ought therefore to have told me 
 <• of his coming, and what your brother had wrote- 
 '• concerning him, and I fhould then have let Mr. 
 " Staple know it would be to no purpofe to make 
 '« any courtfliip to you, as I did to another juft 
 
 ' before 
 

<#PG# 137>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 127 
 *' before I came home, who I find has taken a 
 *' great fancy to you ; but I have given him his an- 
 '' fwer; for my part I do not undcrftand this way 
 " of making gentlemen lofe their time.*' 
 
 'Tis probable thefe laft words nettled Mifs Betfy 
 more than all the reft he had faid ; fhe imagined 
 herfelf fecure of the hearts of both Trueworth and 
 Staple, but was vexed to the heart to have loit the 
 addrefles of a third admirer, through the fcruplouf- 
 nefs of Mr. Goodman, who fhe looked upon to 
 have nothing to do with her affairs in this particu- 
 lar : (he was too cunning, however, to let him fee 
 what her thoughts were on that occafion, and only 
 
 faid that he might do as he pleafed ; that (he did 
 
 not want a hufband ; that all men were alike to 
 
 her : but added, that it fecmed ftrange to her, 
 
 that a young woman who had her fortune to make 
 might not be allowed to hear all the different pro- 
 pofals (hould be offered to her on that fcorc, and 
 with thefe words flung out of the room, and went 
 up into her chamber, nor would be prevailed upon 
 to come down again that night, though Mifs Flora, 
 and Mr. Goodman himfelf, repenting he had faid- 
 fo much, called to her for that purpofe. 
 
 CHAP. XVI. 
 
 Prefents the reader with the name and chara5ier 
 of Mifs Betfy's third lover ^ and alfo with fame 
 other particulars, 
 
 THOUGH lady Mellafm had fecmed to 
 blame Mifs Betfy for not having communi- 
 cated to Mr. Goodman what Iier brother wrote to 
 her in relation to Mr. Trueworth, yet in her heart 
 Ihe was far from being averfe to her receiving a plu- 
 rility of lovers, becaufe whenever that young lady 
 G 4 ftiould 
 

<#PG# 138>
2S rhe HISTORY of 
 (hould fix her choice, there was a poflibility (omt 
 one 01 ot-her of thofe fhe rejccSled might tranfmit 
 f^is aaJreiles to her daughter, whom fhe was ex- 
 tremLiy defirous of getting married, and had never- 
 
 yet been once follicited on honourable terms : • 
 
 iLe therefore told her hufband, that he ought not 
 to liinder Mifs Betfy from hearing what every gen- 
 tlem?.ii had to offer, to the end flie might accept 
 that which had the profpect of moft advantage to 
 her. 
 
 Mr. Goodman in this, as in every thing elfe, fuf- 
 fered himfelf to be di reded by her judgment, and 
 the next morning, when Mifs Betfy came down, 
 talked to her with his ufual plcafantry. " Weil," 
 faid he, " have you forgiven my ill humour lafl 
 *' night ? I was a little vexed to think my friend 
 *' Staple had fo poor a chance for gaining you, and 
 *^ the more fo becauTc Frank Thoughtlefs will 
 *.^ take it ill of me, that I have done any thing in 
 ** oppofiiicn to the perfon he recommends ; but 
 ' you muft acL as you pleafe j for my part I fliaJi 
 
 not meddle any farther in thefe affairs. 
 
 *' Sir," replied Mifs Betfy, very gravely, I Tnall 
 *' always be thankful to my friends for their advice, 
 *' and whenever I think ferioufly of a hufband fliall 
 *' not fail to intreat yours in my choice ; but," 
 continued (he, '' one would imagine my brother, 
 *' by writing fo prcilingly to you, wanted to hur- 
 '' ry me into a marriage whether I would or no ; 
 " and though I have as much regard for him, as a 
 •' fifter can or ought to have, yet I fhall never be 
 •* prevailed uponliy him to enter into a ftate to 
 *^ v/hich at prefent I have rather an averfion than 
 ■" inclination." 
 
 , *' That is," faid Mr. Goodman, '' you have ra- 
 
 '« ther an averfion, than an inclination, to the per- 
 
 «< fons who addrefs you on that fcore." ** No, 
 
 «* Sir," anfwered fhe, «* not at all : the per fons 
 
 ' '' and 
 

<#PG# 139>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 129 
 
 '^ and behaviour, both cf Mr, Trueworth and Mr. 
 '• Staple, appear to me to be unexcep:ionab!ej bur 
 <' fure one may allow a man to have merit, and be 
 *' pleafed with hfs conveifation, without dcTiring 
 *' to be t;icked to him for ever. I verily believe i 
 *' fliall never be in love ; but if I r.m, it muft be a 
 " long length of time, and a ferics of perfeverirg 
 " afTiduities mufb make me fo.'* 
 
 Mr. Goodman told her, thefe were only roman- 
 tic notions, which, he doubted not, but a little lime 
 would cure her of. What reply Mifs Betfy would 
 have made is uncertain, for the difcourle was inter- 
 rupted by a footman delivering a letter to her, in 
 which fl.e found thefe lines : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Tjioughtless. 
 
 * Fa 17^ Creature, 
 
 * T A M no courtier, —-no beau,— -and have 
 ' X hitherto had but little communication with 
 ' your fex j but I am honeft and fincerc, and you 
 « may depend on the truth of what I fay. I liave, 
 
 * heaven be praifcd, acquired a very large fortune, 
 
 * and for fomc time iiave had thoughts of marryirg, 
 ' to the end I might have a fon to enjuy the fruit 
 
 * of my labours, after I am food either for the 
 
 * filhcs, or the v/orms : it is no great matter 
 
 * Vv'hicli of them. Now I have been wifhed to fc- 
 
 * vera! fine women, but my fancy gives the prefer- 
 ' ence to you ; and if you can like me as v»'cll, v/e 
 
 * fliall be very happy together. I fpoke to yotr 
 ' guardian ycfterday, for I love to be above-board; 
 ' but he fccmcd to lour, or, as we fay at fea, to 
 ' be a liitle hazy on the matter, fo I thought I 
 ' would trouble him no farther, but write diredly 
 
 * to you. I hear there are tv.'o about you -y but 
 
 * vv'hat of that? I have doubled the Cape of Good 
 
 * Hope many a time, and never failed of reaching 
 
 G 5 ' my 
 

<#PG# 140>
1^0 ne HISTORY^/ 
 
 ' my intended port, 1 therefore fee no cauf;: wh^ 
 
 * I ihoLild: apprehend a wreck by land. I am turn- 
 
 * cd of eight and forty, 'tis true, which may-be 
 
 * you may tiiink too old j. but I muft tell you, dcac 
 
 * pretty one, that I have a conilitutlon that wilf 
 
 * wear out twenty of your waihy pampered land- 
 
 * men of not half my age. Whatever your for- 
 
 * tune is 1 will fettle accordingly, and moreover 
 
 * will fecure fomcthing hi^ndfome to vou at my d<i' 
 
 * ceafe, in cafe you fliould: chance to be the longed 
 
 * liver, i knov/ you ycung women do not care a 
 
 * man fhould have any thing under you hand, fo ex- 
 
 * pcct no anflvcr ; but dclirc you will confuicr on 
 
 * my propofals, and let me know your mind thiij 
 
 * evening at five o'clock, when I fiiall come to 
 
 * Mr. Goodman's, let him take it how he Vv'ill. I 
 ' can weather out any ftorm to come at yxiu^ and 
 
 * fiucerely am, 
 
 ' Dear S-ul, 
 ' Your moit faithful, 
 
 ' And affedionate lover, 
 
 ^ J. Hysom.'^ 
 
 There were (<jmQ paflages in this letter that fet 
 Mifs Betfy into fuch immoderate fits of laughter, as 
 made her a long time in going through it. Having 
 hniflied the whole, fhe turned to Mr, Goodman, 
 and putting it into his hands, *-' Be pleafed. Sir, 
 •■' to read that," faid fhe, " you fliall own, at 
 '* Icaft, that I do not make a fecret of all my 
 ''lovers to you." Mr. Goodnran f-d'on looked it 
 Gvcr, and after returning it to her, '' How trou- 
 **- blefome a tl}ing it is," faid he, '* to be the guar- 
 •* dian of a beautiful young lady ! whether I grant, 
 *'^ or vvlicther I refufe the confent required of 
 *' mo.^ I cqu.illy gain illv/ill from one fide or the 
 
 -'** i)tfUT." 
 
 Lady 
 

<#PG# 141>
Mifs Betsy Thought le's. 131 
 
 Lady Mcliafm, who had all this morning com- 
 plained of a violent head ach, and faid nothing du- 
 rhng this converfation, now cried out, *' What new 
 *' conquefl is this Miis Bctfy has made ? '* " O, 
 '' madam, replied Mifs Betfy, '' your ladyfh'p 
 " fhail JLulge of the value of it, by the dough- 
 «^ ty epiillti 1 have juft received." With thefc 
 words (he gave the letter to Mifs Flora, defiring her 
 to read it aloud, which {he did, but was obliged, 
 as- Mifs BetiV hcrfclf had done, to flop fcveral 
 times, and hold her fides, before ihe got to the con- 
 clufion, and lady Mcllafin, as little as flie was then 
 inclined to mirth, could not forbear fmiling at hear- 
 ing the manner in which this declaration of love 
 was penned. " You are all very merry," faid Mr, 
 Cjoodman, " but I can tell you, captain Hyfom 
 " is a match that many a fine lady in this town 
 *' would junip at ; he has been twenty-five years 
 '^ in the fervice of the Eaft-India company, has 
 " made very fucccfsful voyages, and is immenfely 
 '^ rich ; he has lived at fea, indeed, the greatefl: 
 " part of his life, and much politcnefs cannot be 
 " expe«£le i from him; but he is a very honelt 
 '' good-natured man, and 1 believe means well. I 
 *' wifli he had offered himfclf to Flora." Perhaps, 
 " Sir, I (hould not have refufcd him," replied (he, 
 brifkly ; " 1 (hould like ahufband prodigiouHy that 
 " would be abroad for three whole years tcy:cther, 
 " and leave me to bov/1 about in my coa.ch itnd fix, 
 '' while he ploughed the ocean in fearch of new 
 " treafures to throw into my lap at his return." 
 
 '' Well, well," faid Mifs Betfy, laughing f^ill 
 more, '' who knows but when 1 have teized hinn 
 ** a little, he may fly for (liclter to your moi-e clc- 
 " ment goodnefs." Aye! aye," cried Mr. Good- 
 man, '*• you are a couple of mad-caps, indeed, 
 " and I fuppcvfc betv/een you both the captain will 
 * b^ £ni;ly managed,, but no matter^ i (hall not 
 
 pity 
 

<#PG# 142>
1^2 Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 " pity him, as I partly told him what he might ex- 
 *' pe6t." 
 
 After this Mr. Goodman went out, and the young 
 ladies went up to drefs againft dinner, diverting 
 thcmfelves all the time with the poor captain's let- 
 ter. Mifs Betfy told Mifs Flora, that as he was 
 for coming fo diredtly to the point, fhe muft ufe all 
 her artifice, in order to keep him in fufpencc : 
 *' for," faid fhe, *' if I fhould let him know any 
 *' part of my real fentiments concerning him, he 
 *' would be gone at once, and we fhould lofe all 
 ** our fport : I will, therefore,'* contmued flie, 
 *' make him believe, that I dare not openly en- 
 ** courage his pretenlions, becaufe my brother had 
 ** recommended one gentleman to me, and Mr. 
 " Goodman another; but fliall aiTure him, at the 
 *' fame time, that lam inclined to neither of thcfti, 
 *'• and fliall contrive to get rid of them both, as 
 " focTj as po^ible : this," faid (he, " will keep him 
 *' in hopes, without my downright proniifmg ary 
 ** thing in his particular favour." 
 
 Mifs Flora told her, (he was a perfe£l Machiavcl 
 in love aftliirs, and was about to fay fomething 
 more, when a confufed found of feveral voices, a- 
 mong which (he diftinguiflied that of lady Mellafin 
 very loud, made her run down ftairs to fee what 
 WHS thcoccafion ; but Mifs Betfy ftaycd in the 
 chamber, being bufily employed in fomething be- 
 longing to her drefs, or had fhe been Icfs engaged, 
 it is not probable fhe would have troubled hcrfclf 
 about the matrer, as (he fuppofed it only a quarrel 
 betv/ecn lady Mellafin, and fom§ of the fervants, 
 as in cffedl it was, and file, wiinout a>king, was 
 immediately' imformed. 
 
 Nanny, the upper houfe-maid, and the fame 
 who had delivered Mr. Saving's letter to Mifs 
 Betfy, and tarried her anfwer to him, coming up 
 with a broom in her hand, in order to fweep her 
 
 lady's 
 

<#PG# 143>
A///jf Betsy Thoughtless. 13^ 
 
 ladv's d re fling- room, ran into the chamber of M1T3 
 Bttly, and feeing that (ho was alone, " O Mifs !" 
 faid riie, " there is the devil to do below.'* " I 
 " heard a fad noife, indeed," faid fhe carelefly. 
 '^ Why you muft know, Mifs," cried the maid, 
 " that my lady had given John the butler warning, 
 " and fo his time being up, Mrs. Prinks had or- 
 ** dcrstopay him oft' this morning, but would have 
 *' flopped thirty (hillings for a filvcr orange-ftrainer 
 *' that is mifling. John would not allow it, and 
 *' being in a paflion, told Mrs. Prhiks, that he 
 *' would not leave thehoufe without his full wages, 
 *' that for any thing he knew the ftrainer might 
 " be gone after the diamond necklace. This I 
 *' fuppofe (he repeated to my lady, and that put 
 ** her in fo ill a humour this morning, that if mv 
 *' mafter had not come down as he did, we (hould 
 " all have had fomething at our heads. However," 
 continued the wench, " fhe ordered Mrs. Prinks 
 *' to give him his whole money ; but, would you 
 •' believe it Mifs? My mafter was no fooner gone 
 " out, than file came down into the kitchen rav- 
 *' ing, and finding John there ftill, (the poor fcl- 
 *' low, God knovv's, only ftaycd to tnkc his leave 
 *' of us,) {he tore about, and fwore we fliould 
 " all go ; accufed one of one thins, and another 
 «« of another." '' Well, but what did the fel- 
 *' Ijl^v mean about the Siamond rKcklace ?" cried 
 Mifs Bctfy, interrupting her. *' I will tell you 
 *' the whole fiory," faid (he, but you muft pro- 
 ** mife never to fpeak a word of it to any body ; 
 *' for though Ido not value the place, nor will ftay 
 ** much longer ; yet they v/culd not give oiie a 
 " cbaracflcr, ycu know, Mifs," 
 
 Mifs Betfy then having afilired her, fhe would ne- 
 ver menticn it, the ether fl:ut the door, zud went 
 on in a very low voice, in this manner. 
 
 Don't 
 

<#PG# 144>
1 34 Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 ' Don't you remember, Mifs" faid fhe, < what a 
 flurry my lady and Mrs. Prinks were in one day r 
 • how her Jadylhip pulled ofFall her fine cloaths, and 
 they both went out in a hackney coach 3 then- 
 Mrs. Prinks came home, and went qut again ?' 
 Yes,' replied MifsBctfy, I took notice they were 
 both in a good dc.il of confufion.' . ' .Aye, Mifs, 
 well they might,' laid Nanny \ ' that very after- 
 noon John was gone to Tee a coufui that keeps 
 a pawn- broker's (hop in Thieving- kiuc, and as 
 he was fittirig in a little room behind the coun- 
 ter, that it feems {huts in with glafs doors, who 
 (liould he fee dirough the whidow,. but Mrs. 
 Prinks come in j fhe brought my lady's diamond 
 necklace, and pledged it for a hundred and twen- 
 ty, or a hundred and thirty guineas, T am jiot 
 fure which he told mc, for i have the faddeft 
 memory j but it is no matter for that. John- 
 was itrangely confounded, as you may think, but 
 refolvcd to fee into the bottom, and when Mrs. 
 Prinks was got in.to the coach, popped up'b<jhind 
 it, and got down when it flopped, which was at 
 the fign of the hand andtipQaff in Knaves-acre ;- 
 fo that this money was raifcd to get fomebody 
 that was arrelled out of the ballifF's hands, for 
 John faid, it was what they call a fpunging- 
 hgufc that Mrs, Prinks went into. Lord! how? 
 deceitful fome people are, my poor mafter little 
 ', thinks liOV/ his money gc^es ; but Fli v/arrant our 
 houfe- keeping mufr fufFer for this.' 
 This gC'iTiping yourg iiufilry would have run on 
 much longer, doubtlefs, with her comments on 
 this affair ; but hearing Mifs Flora's foot ufw^n the 
 ffairs, fhe left i:.?i^ and opening the doo>, foltly 
 fiipt into her lady's drcfling- room, and fell to' work 
 iu cleaning it. 
 
 Mifs Flora came up, exclaiming on the ill be- 
 luvicui: of moft fervants, telling Mifs Betfy v/hat 
 

<#PG# 145>
Mifs ]^ETSY Thoughtless. 135 
 
 a paffion her mamma had been in. The other 
 made little anfwer to what (h^ faid on that or any 
 other fcore, having her thoughts very much ta- 
 ken up with the account juft given her by Nanny ; 
 file recoiiv^cled that lady Mellafm had never dreflcd 
 fince that day, always making fomc excufc to a- 
 void paying any grand vifits, which ihc now doubt- 
 ed not bat it was bccaufe flie had not her necklace. 
 It very much amazed her, as (he well knew her 
 ladylliip was never without a good deal of ready 
 caili, therefore was certain the fum muft be large 
 indeed, for which her friend was arretted, that it 
 reduced her to the neccffity of applying to a pawn- 
 broker, and who that friend could be for whom 
 fhe would thus demean hcrfelf, puzzled her ex- 
 tremely. It was not long, however, before (lie 
 was let into the fecret, but in the mean time 
 other matters of mere moment muft be treated 
 on. 
 
 CHAP. XVII. 
 
 Is of up imp:rtance than the former .^ yet mu/i not 
 
 be omitted, 
 
 LADY Mellafm having vented her fplcen on 
 thofe, who by their ftations were obliged to 
 bear it, and the objec^t of it removed out of the 
 houfc, became extremely chearful the remaining 
 part of the day. The falhicn in which it might be 
 fuppofed Mifs Betfy would be accofted by her tar- 
 paulin enamorato, and the reception (he would 
 give his paiTion, oecafioned a great ckal of merri- 
 ment, and even Mr. Goodman, feeing his dear wife 
 took part in it, w'ould fometiincs throw in hia 
 joke» 
 
 ^ WelJ, 
 

<#PG# 146>
136 "fhe HISTO R Y of 
 
 '' Well, well," cried Mifs Betfy, to heighten 
 the diverfion, '* what will you fay now, if I (liould 
 *' take a fancy to the captain, fo far as to prefer 
 *' him to any of thofe who think it worth their 
 '* while to follicit me on the fcorc of love V* 
 
 " This is quite ungenerous in you," cried Mifs 
 Flora, " did you not promife to turn the captain 
 '' over to me, when you had done with him/* — 
 ^* That may not happen a great while," replied 
 the other ; " for I affure you I have feen him three 
 " or four times, when he has called here on bu- 
 *' finefs to Mr. Goodman, and think to part with 
 " a lover of his formidable afpeiSl: woidd be to dc- 
 '' prive myfelf of the moft confpicuous of my 
 " whole train of admirers ; but fuppofe," con- 
 tinued (he, in the fame gay flrain, *' I reiign to 
 " you Mr. Staple or Mr. Trueworth, would not 
 «« that do as well P'' 
 
 '' Do not put me in the head of either of them, I 
 *' befcech you," faid Mifs Flora, '^ for fear I ihoul 
 *' think too ferioufiy on the matter, and it ihouli 
 •' not be in your power to oblige me." 
 
 «' All that muft be left to chance," cried Mifs 
 Bctfy : " but fo far I dare promife you, as to do 
 *' enough tv) make them Jieartiiy weary of their 
 " courtihip to me, and at liberty to make their ad- 
 *' drefles el fe where." 
 
 After this they fell Into fome conveifation con- 
 cerning the merits of the two lad mentioned gen- 
 tlemen : • they allowed Mr. Staple to have the 
 
 finefl face, and that Mr. Trueworth was the beft 
 fliaped, and had the moft graceful air in every 
 thing he did : — Mr. Staple had an infinity of gaie- 
 ty, both in his look and behaviour : Mr. True- 
 worth had no Icfs of fwcetnefs, and if his deport- 
 ment feemed fomevvhat too fcrious for a man of 
 his years, it was well atoned for by the excellence" 
 of his underHanding, —'—Mifs Flora bov/cver faid 
 
 upon 
 

<#PG# 147>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 137 
 
 Upon the whole, that both of them were charming 
 men, and lady Mellafm added, that it was a great 
 pity either of them fhould have bcftowed his heart 
 where there was fo little likelihood of ever receiv- 
 ing any recompence.— '* Why fo, my dear," 
 cried Mr. Goodman, " if my pretty charge is at 
 *' prefcnt in a humour to make as many fools as 
 " fhe can in this world, I hope fhc is not detcr- 
 
 ** mined to lead apes in another ; I warrant 
 
 *' fhe will change her mind one time or other. 
 
 *' I only wifh file may not, as the old faying is, 
 
 '^ out ftand her market." 
 
 While they were thus difcourfing, a fervant 
 brought a letter from Mr. Staple, dirc<5^ed to Mifs 
 Betfy Thoughilefs, which was immediately deliver- 
 ed to her : on being told from whence it came, 
 
 gave it to Mr. Goodman, faying, " I fhall make 
 
 " no fccret of the contents, therefore, dear 
 
 *' guardian, read it for the benefit of the com- 
 " pany." 
 
 Mr. Goodman fhook his head at the little fcn- 
 fibility file tef^ificd of his friend's devoirs, but 
 fuid nothing, being willing to gratify the curiofity 
 he doubted not but they all were in, Mifs Bctfy 
 Ix^rfelf not excepted, as carelefs as flic afFedted to 
 be, which he did by reading in an audible voice 
 thefe lines : 
 
 To the mofl amiable and moft accompliflicd of 
 her fex. 
 
 * Madam^ 
 
 * TF the face be the index of the mind, (as I think 
 
 * A one of our bed poets takes upon him to af- 
 
 * fert) your foul muft certainly be all made up of 
 
 * harmony, and confequently take delight in what 
 
 * has fo great a fimilitude of its own heavenly na- 
 
 * ture. 1 flatter my felf, therefore, you will not 
 
 « be 
 

<#PG# 148>
138 The HIST DRY of 
 
 be offended that I prefume to intreat you will 
 grace with your prcfencc, a piece of mufic, com- 
 pofed by the (o juftly celebrated fignor Bonan- 
 cini, and 1 liope will have juftice done it In the 
 performance, — they being the beft hands in 
 town that arc employed. 
 
 * I do myfelf the honour to inclofc tickets for 
 
 * the ladies of Mr. Goodman's family, and beg 
 
 * leave to wait on you this afternoon, in the plea- 
 *■ fing expectation, not only of being permitted to 
 
 * attend you to the concert, but alfo of an oppor- 
 ' tunity of renewing thofe humble and fmcerepro- 
 ' fefTions I yefterday began to make, of a paflion, 
 
 * which only charms fuch as yours could have the 
 ' power of infpiring in any heart, and can be felt 
 
 * by none with greater warnuJi, zeal, tcnderncfs, 
 
 * and refpeft, than by that of him who is, and c- 
 
 * ver mufl be, 
 
 Madam, 
 * Your moft pafiionate, 
 
 ' And moft faithful admirer, 
 * T. Staple. 
 
 * P. S. If there are any other ladles of your ac- 
 
 ' quaintance, to whom you think the entertain- 
 ' ment may be agreeable, be pleafed to make 
 ' the invitation, I fliall bring tickets with 
 
 * me to accommodate whoever you choofe to 
 ' accompany you. — Once more I befeech youy 
 ' madam, to believe me as above, 
 
 ' Yours, &c.' 
 
 Mr. Goodman had fcarce finiflied reading this" 
 letter, when lady Mellafin and her daughter both 
 cried out, at the fame time, " O Mifs Betfy, — 
 *' how unlucky this happens :— — what will you 
 " do with the captain now I 
 
 « We 
 

<#PG# 149>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 139 
 
 *' We will take him with us to the concert,'* 
 ** replied (he ; — — " and in my opinion nothing 
 *' could have fallen out more fortunately.— The 
 *' captain has appointed to vifit me at five, — 
 " Mr. Staple will, doubtlefs, be here about that 
 ** time, if not before, in oider to ufher us to the 
 • entertainment, fo that my tar cannot ex{:e(5l any 
 ' anfvvcr from me to his letter, and confequently 
 •' Ifliall gain time." 
 
 Though Mr. Goodman was far from approving 
 this way of proceeding, yet he could not forbear 
 fmiling with the reft, at Mifs Betfy's contrivance, 
 and told her, it was a pity (lie was not a man, Cie 
 would have made a rare miniftcr of (late. 
 
 '' Well, fince it is fo," faid lady Meliafm, " I 
 *' will have the honour of complimenting the cap- 
 " tain with the ticket Mr. Staple intended for me.'* 
 Botli Mifs Flora and Mifs Bctly prcfied her ladyfliip 
 to be of their company, and Mr. Goodman like- 
 wife endeavoured to perfwade her to go ; but fhe 
 excufed herfelf, faying, " A concert was never a- 
 " mong the number of thofe entertainments (he 
 *' took pleafure in :*' on which they left off fpeak- 
 ing any farther on it ; — but Mifs Betfy was not at 
 a lofs in her own mind to guefs the true reafon of 
 her kdyfhip's refufal, and looked on it as a confirma- 
 tion of the truth of what Nanny had told her, con- 
 cerning the diamond necklace. 
 
 There feemed, notwithftanding, one difficulty 
 flill remaining for Mifs Betfy to get over ; which 
 was the probability of Mr. Trueworth's making her 
 a vifit that afternoon ; — (he did not choofe to leave 
 him to go to the concert, nor yet to afk him to ac- 
 company them to it, becaufe fhe thought it would 
 be eafy for a man of his penetration to difcover that 
 Mr. Staple was his rival ; which (he was by no 
 means willing he (hould ^o before he had made a 
 "^v^claration to her of bis own paflion. 
 
 aiic 
 

<#PG# 150>
HP - The HISTORY of 
 
 She was beginning to confider how fne fhould 
 manage in a point, which flie looked upon as pret- 
 ty delicate, when a letter from that gentleman cafed 
 her cf all the apprehenfions ine at prefcnt had, on 
 his fcore. — The manner m which heexpreflcd him- 
 {qM was as follows : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 * T Remember (as what can .be forgot in which 
 ' 1. you have the lead concern) that the firit time 
 
 * I had the honour of feeing you at Oxford, you 
 *■ Teemed to take a great deal of pleafure in the 
 ' pretty tricks of a fquirrel, wliich a lady in the 
 ' company had on her arm : — one of thofe animals 
 ' (which they teii me has been lately catched) hap- 
 
 * pening to fall in my way, I take the liberty of 
 
 * prefenting him to you, intreatlng you will permit 
 
 * him to give yo'J fiJch diverfion as is in his power. 
 *-*' ——Were the little denizen of the woods endu- 
 ' ed with any fhare of human reafon, how happy 
 ' would he think himfelf in the lofs of his liberty, 
 ' and how hug thofe chains which entitle him to fo 
 
 * glorious a fcrvitude.' 
 
 ' I had waited on Vsou in perfon, in the hope of 
 
 * obtaining pardon for approaching you with fd 
 ' trilling an oftering ; but am deprived of that fa- 
 
 * tisfa6tion by the prefling commands of an old 
 
 * aunt, who infifts on my palling this evening with 
 ' her : — but what need is there to apologize for the 
 
 * abfence of a perfon fo little known to you, and 
 ' whofe fentiments are yet lefs fo ? I rather ought 
 
 * to fear that the frequency of thofe vifits I fhall 
 
 * hereafter make, may be looked upon as taking 
 
 * too prefuming an advantage of the permifiion you 
 ' have been fo good to give me. I will not, how- 
 
 * ever, anticipate fo great a misfortune, but cndea- 
 
 * vour 
 

<#PG# 151>
jl///}' Betsy Thought Ltss. 141 
 
 * vour to prevent.it by proving, by all the ways I 
 
 * ani able, tlut I am, 
 
 * With the moft profound fubmiflion, 
 ' MaJani, 
 * Your very humble, obedicnC, 
 ' And eternally devoted fcrvant, 
 
 ' C. True WORTH.* 
 
 Mifs Betfy, after having read t^.is letter, ordered 
 the perfon who brought it (hould come into the par- 
 lour ; on which he delivered to her the prefent men- 
 tioned in the letter, which (he received with a great 
 deal of fwectncfs, gave the fellow fomething to 
 drink her health, and fcnt her fervicc to his mailer, 
 with thanks, and an afl'urancc that (lie (hould be glad 
 to fee him, whenever it fuitcd with his conve- 
 nience. 
 
 All the ladies then began to examine the fquir- 
 rel, which was, doubtlefs, the mod beautiful creature 
 of its kind, that could be purchafed : the chain, 
 which faftcned it to its habitation, was gold, 
 
 the links very thick, and curioufly wrought. 
 
 Kvcry one admired the elegance of tlie donor's 
 lafte. 
 
 Mifs Bctfy hcrfelf was charmed to an cxcefs, 
 both with the letter and the prefent ; but as much 
 as (he was pleafcd with the refpecS^ful paflion of Mr. 
 Truevvorth, fliC could not iind in her heart to think 
 of parting with the i fiiduities of Mr. Staple, nor e- 
 ven the blunt addreiTes of captain Hyfom, at leaft 
 *till (he had exercifed all the power her beauty gave 
 her over them. 
 
 As the two laft mentioned gentlemen were the 
 friends of Mr. Goodman, he went out fomcu'hat 
 before the hour in wl.ldi either of them \vas txpecl- 
 ed to come, chufuig not to feem to know what it 
 
 * -was not in his power to amend, and djtermiried, as 
 he had prc>mifed Mifs Bctfy, not to interfere be- 
 tween 
 

<#PG# 152>
,42 The HISTORY of 
 
 tween her and any of thofe who pretended to court 
 her. 
 
 Thefe two lovers came to the door at the fame 
 time, and Mr. Staple faying to the footman that 
 opened the door, that he was come to wait on 
 
 Mifs Betfy. «' I want to fpeak with that young 
 
 *'' gentlewoman too,*' cried* the captain, " if 
 
 *' {he be at leifurc ; tell her my name is 
 
 " Hyfom." 
 
 Mr. Staple was immediately fhewed up into the 
 dining-room, and the captain in the parlour, 'till 
 Mifs Betfy fhould be told his name: " That fpark," 
 faid he to himfelf, " I find is known here, I fuppofe 
 *' he is one of thofe Mr. Goodman told me of, 
 *' that has a mind to Mifs Betfy ; but as fhe knew 
 *' I was to be here, I think fne might have left fome 
 ** orders concerning me, and not made me wait 
 " till that young; gew-gaw had fpoke his mind to 
 « her." 
 
 The fellow not coming dov/n immediately, he 
 grew very angry, and began to call and knock with 
 his cane againft the floor, which, it may be eafily 
 
 imagined, gave fome fport to thofe above. 
 
 Mifs Betfy, however, having told Mr. Staple the 
 charadler of the man, and the diverfion fhe intend- 
 ed to make of bis pretcnfions, would not vex him 
 too much, and to atone for having made him attend 
 To long, went to the top of the ftairs herfelf, and 
 defired him to walk up. 
 
 Tlie reception fhe gave him was full of all the 
 fweetnefs fhe could afllime, and excufed having 
 made him wait, and laid the blame on the fervant, 
 who, fhe pretended, could not preil-ntly recollect 
 
 his name : this put him into an exceeding good 
 
 humour, ': Nay, fair lady," faid he, " as to that 
 *' I liave ftayed much longer fomctimes, before I 
 " could get to the fpecch of fome people, who 1 
 
 " have 
 

<#PG# 153>
A/?/; Betsy Thoughtless. 14.3 
 
 *^ have not half the refpeil for as I have for you ; 
 
 <« but you knovi^," continued he, giving her 
 
 a kifs, the fmack of which might be heard three 
 rooms off, " that 1 havebufinefs v/ith you, 
 *' bufmefs that requires difpatch, and that made me 
 <' a little impatient." 
 
 All the company had much ado to refrain laugh- 
 ing out-right, but Mifs Betfy kept her countenance 
 to a miracle, '^ We will talk of bufinefs another 
 *' time," faid (he, " we are going to hear a fine 
 
 " entertainment of mufick ; you muft not re- 
 
 " fufe giving us your company, lady Mellafm 
 
 " has got a ticket on purpofe for you. " I am 
 
 '' very much obliged to her ladyfhip," replied the 
 captain, " but I do not know whether Mr. Good- 
 " man may think well of it or not j for he would 
 " fain have put me off from vifiting his charge 
 
 <« here. 1 foon found by his way of fpeakingthe 
 
 " wind did not fet fair for me from that quarter, Co 
 
 " tacked about, fhifted my fails, and flood for 
 
 *< the port direaiy." 
 
 *' Manfully refolvcd, indeed !" faid Mr. Staple; 
 *' but I hope, captain, you have kept a good iook- 
 *' out, in order to avoid any {hip of greater bur- 
 *' then, that might elfe chance to overfet you."— 
 '* Oh, Sir ! as to that," replied the captain, '* you 
 " might have fpared yourfelf the trouble of giving 
 " me this caution, there are only two fmall pinks 
 *' in my way, and they had beft ftand clear, or I 
 *•' (hall run foul of them." 
 
 Though Mr. Staple had been apprized before- 
 hand of the capt.u)i's pretences, and that Mifs Betfy 
 intended to encourage them only by way of amufe- 
 ment toherfelf and friends, yet the rough manner in 
 which his rival had uttered thefe words, brought the 
 blood into his cheeks, which lady MelJafin perceiv- 
 ing, and fearing thj.t what was began in jefl might in 
 ihe end become more ferious than could be wifhed, 
 
 turned 
 

<#PG# 154>
144 7^^^? HISTORY of. 
 turned the converfation, and addrefling herfelfto 
 the captain, on the fcore of what he had faid con- 
 cerning Mr. Goodman, made many apologies for 
 
 her husband's behaviour in this point : affured 
 
 him, that he had not a more fnicere friend in the 
 world, nor one who would be more ready to fervc 
 him, in whatever Was m his power. 
 
 The captain had a fund of great good- nature 
 in kis lieart, but \vas fomewhat too much addicfted 
 to paflion, and frequently apt to refent without a 
 .caufe, but when once convinced he had been in the 
 wrong, no one could be moreieady to acknowledge 
 and ask paidon for his miilake : — — he had been 
 .bred at fca ; — ^ — his converfation, for almoft his 
 whole life, had been, chiefly among thofc of his 
 own occupation j he was altogether unacquain- 
 ted with the manners and behaviour of the polite 
 .world, and equally a Granger to what is called gen- 
 teel raillery, as he was to courtly complaifance ; it 
 is not, therefore, to be wondered at, that he was 
 often rude, v/ithout defigning to be {o^ and took 
 many things as affronts, which were not meant as 
 fuch. 
 
 Lady Mellafin, who never wanted words, and 
 knew how to ex^refs herfelf in the mofl perfuafive 
 terms, whenever flie pleafed to make ufe of them, 
 had the addrcfs to convince the captain, that Mr. 
 Goodman was- no enemy to his fuit, though he 
 would not. appear to encourage it. 
 
 \VhiIe the captain vn\% engaged with her ladyfhip 
 m this dir<:o;rfc, Mifs Betfy look the opportunity 
 of telling Mr. Staple tliat fne infifled upon it, that 
 he fhouid be very civil to a rival from whofe pre- 
 tenuons he might be certain he had nothing to ap- 
 prehend, and moreover that when {he gave him her 
 band to lead her into the concert- rocin, he fhouid 
 give his to Mifs Flora, without difcovcring the 
 kaft marks of dilconteiit : — -the lover looked on 
 
 this 
 

<#PG# 155>
Mifs Betsy Thcughtlcss. 14; 
 this laft injunction as too fevere a trial of his pa- 
 tience ; but (he would needs have it fo, and 
 he was under a neceflity of obeying, or of fuf- 
 fering much greater mortifioration from her dif- 
 pleafure. 
 
 Soon after this they all four went to the enter- 
 tainment in Mr. Goodman's coach, which lady 
 
 Mellafm had olered to begot ready. Th6 
 
 captain was mightily pleafed with the mufic, and 
 had judgment enough in it to know it was better 
 than the band he had on board his fhip ;■ 
 *' When they have done playing," faid he, " I 
 " will afk them what they will have to go with 
 *' me the next voyage ;" but Mr. Staple told him, 
 it would be an affront, that they were men who 
 got more by their inftruments than the bed officer 
 
 either by fea or land did by his commiliion.- 
 
 This miftake, as well as inany others the captain 
 fell into, made not only the company he was with, 
 but thofe who fat near enough to hear him, a good 
 deal of diverfion. 
 
 Nothing of moment happening either here, or at 
 Mr. Goodman'5, vi'hcre they all fupped together, it 
 would be needlefs to repeat any particulars of their 
 converfation ; what has been faid already of their dif- 
 ferent fentiments and behaviour, may be a fufficient 
 fample of the whole. 
 
 C ri A P. XVIII. 
 
 Treats on no frejh matters^ but ferves to heighten 
 thofe already 7ncntioned, 
 
 MR. Goodman had flayed abroad 'till very late 
 that night the concert had been performed, fo 
 was not a witnefs of any thing that had palled af- 
 ter the company came home ; but on lady Mella- 
 VoL. I. ' H fin's 
 

<#PG# 156>
14^ fhe HISTORY cf 
 
 fin's repeating to him every thing fhe remembered, 
 was very well pleafed to hear that {he had reconciled 
 the captain to him, though extremely forry, that 
 the blunt ill-judged afFe6lion of that gentleman had 
 expofed him to the ridicule, not only of MifsBetfy, 
 but ai fo of all her follov/ers. 
 
 That young laJy, in the mean time, was far 
 from having any commiferation for the anxieties of 
 thofe who loved her ;■ on the contrary, fhc tri- 
 umphed in the pains ihe gave, if it can be fuppo- 
 fed that (he, who was altogether ignorant of them 
 in herfelf, could look upon them as fincere in o- 
 
 thers : —but I am apt to believe ladies of this 
 
 caft, regard all the profeilions of love made to 
 ihcm, (as indeed many of them arej only as words 
 
 of courfe, the prerogative of youth and beauty 
 
 in ihc one fcx, and a duty Incumbent on the other 
 
 to pay ; they value themfclves on the number 
 
 -and quality of their lovers, as they do upon the 
 number and richnefs of their clothes, becaufe it 
 makes them of conGdcration in the world, and never 
 take the trouble of refle(S^ing how dear it may fomc- 
 timcs coft thofe to whom they are indebted for in- 
 dulL!;ing this vanity. 
 
 I'hat this, at leail, was the motive which indu- 
 ced Mifs Iktfy to treat her lovers in the manner fl:)e 
 did, is evident to a demonftration, from every o- 
 
 ther action of her life : fnc had a certain ioft- 
 
 nefs in her difpofition, which rendered her incapa- 
 ble of knowing the diflrefs of any one, without af- 
 fording all tlie relief was in her power to give, 
 and had fhe fooner been convinced of the reality of 
 the woes of love, flic fooner haJ left off the am- 
 bition of inflicting them, and perhaps have been 
 brought to legard thofe who laboured under them, 
 father with top much than tOo little compaflion; 
 
 ' ' — ' but of this the reader will be able to judge 
 
 «ii proceeding farther in th.ii hiOcry. 
 
 There 
 

<#PG# 157>
Af//i Be TSY Thoughtless. 147 
 There were now three gentlemen who all of tbcni 
 addrefled this young lady on the moft honourable 
 terms, yet did her giddy mind make no diftind^ion 
 between the ferious palTion they had for her, and 
 the idle gallantries (he received from thofe who ci- 
 ther had no defign in making them, or fuch as tend- 
 ed to her undoing. 
 
 Impatient to hear in what fafliion Mr. Trueworth 
 would declare himfclf, and imagining he would comft 
 the next day, as he had made fo handfomc an apo- 
 logy for not having waited on her the preceding 
 one, file told Mr. Staple and captain Hyfom, ia 
 order to prevent their coming, that flic w as engaged 
 to pafs that whole afternoon, and evening, withr 
 fome ladies of her acquaintance : neither the cap- 
 tain nor Mr. Staple fufpe6^ed the truth of what The 
 faid, hut the former was in too much hafle to kno\r 
 fome iilue of liis fate to be quite contented with this 
 delay. 
 
 Mifs Ectfy was not deceived in her expccSlatf- 
 
 ons ; ^foon after dinner was over, fhc v/as told 
 
 Mr. Trueworth had fent to know if fhe wai at: 
 home, and beg leave to wait upon her. ~ Ladr 
 Mcllafin having a great deal of company that da/ 
 in the dining-room, (he went into an adjacent one 
 
 to receive him ; he was charmed at finding her 
 
 alone, a happinefs he could not flatter himfelf with, 
 on entering the houfe, as he was aflured by the 
 number of footmen that he faw in the hall, that 
 many vifitnnts were there before him : — ^ — this un- 
 cxpcf^ed piece of good fortune, as he then thoui^rht 
 it, efpecial'y as he found her playing with the fquir- 
 ril he had fent to her the day bcfc/re, (o much 
 elated him, tj):\t it brightened his whole afpef>, and 
 gave a double fhare of vivacity to his eyes, '' May 
 '* I hope your pardon, madam," faid he, " for 
 *' prefuming to approach you with fo tiifling a prc- 
 
 " fent, as that little creature?" < *' Oh, Mr, 
 
 H 2 «' Trueworth!" 
 

<#PG# 158>
.I4S ne H I STO R Y of 
 
 *' Truevvorth !*' anfwered fhe, " I will not for- 
 " give you if you fpeak flightly of my fquirriJ, 
 " though I am indebted to you for the pleafure he 
 
 '' gives me.—— 1 love him exceflively ! you 
 
 *' could not have made mc a more obliging pre- 
 *' fen^" 
 
 " How, madam ! " cried he, *' I fliould be 
 *' miferable, indeed, if 1 had nothing in my power 
 " to ofier more worthy your acceptance than that 
 " animal. — What think you, madam, of an ador- 
 *' ing and paffionatcly devoted heart ? 
 
 *' A heart !" rejoined (he, *' Oh dear, a heart 
 *' may be a pretty thing for ought I know to tlie 
 " contrary ; bx there is fuch an cnclofurc of flefli 
 *^ and bone about it, that it is utterlj-impollible for 
 *' one to fee into it, and confequently to know whe- 
 *' ther one likes it or not." 
 
 "' The heart, madam, in the fcnfe I mean,'* 
 f^id he, " implies the foul, which being a fpirit 
 " and invifible, can only be known by its cffeds : 
 *< ^ — if the whole fervices of mine may render it 
 *' on oblation, fuch as may obtain a gracious recep- 
 " tion from the adorable Mifs Thoughtlefs, I {hall 
 '' blefs the hour in which 1 iirft beheld her 
 *' charms, as the moft fortunate one I ever had to 
 *^ boall of." In ending thefe words he kifled her 
 hano, with a look full of the greateft refpe6l and 
 tenderntfs. 
 
 Siie then told him, the fervices of the foul muft 
 needs be valuable, bccaufe they were lincere j but 
 liS {he knew not .of what nature thoi'e fervices were 
 he inten-ded to render her, he mu{l cxcufe her for 
 
 jiot {o readily accepting them : on which, 
 
 it is not to be doubted, but that hcafTured her, they 
 ihould be only fuch as were di61atcd by the moil 
 ^ure afFe<5tioD, and accompanied by the {lri£left 
 houQur. 
 

<#PG# 159>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 149^ 
 He was going on with fuch proteftations as may 
 be imagined a man fo much enamoured would make 
 to the obje£t of his wifties, when he was interrupt- 
 ed by Mifs Flora, who came haftiiy into the room, 
 and told him, that her mamma hearing that he was 
 in the houfe, expected he would not leave it with- 
 out letting her have the pleature of feeing him : 
 
 that they were juft going to tea, and that her lady- 
 fhip intreated he would join company with ihofe 
 friend* (he had already with her. 
 
 Mr. Trueworth would have been glad to h:.vc 
 found fomc plaufible pretence for not comp'v' 
 ing with this invitation, but as he could w^t m?ke 
 any, that would not he looked on as favouring 
 of ill manners, and Mif:> Betfy infifting en 1 i, 
 going, they all went together into the din!r.<:- 
 room. 
 
 The lover had now no farther opportunity Ok 
 profecuting his fuit in this vifit ; but he m:i c ano- 
 ther the next day, more early thu/n before, and found 
 no-body but Mr. Goodman with Mifs Betfy, Tadr 
 Mellafm and Mifs Flora being gone amojig the 
 liiops, either to buy fonicihing they wanted, or to 
 tumble over goods, as they frequently did, meerlv 
 
 for the fake of feeing new hifliions. Mr. 'Frue- 
 
 worth having never been feen by Mr. Goodman, 
 Mifs Betfy prefented him to him with thefe words, 
 '*' Sir, this is a gentleman from Oxford, an 
 
 '' intimate friend of brother Frank's, and who did 
 '* me the favour to bring me a letter from him.'* 
 There needed no more to make Mr. GoodnKiiv 
 know, both who he was and the bufniefs on which 
 
 he came: he received, him with a great deal of 
 
 good manners ; but knowing his abfcnce would he 
 liioft agreeable, after fume few compliments, pre- 
 tended he was called abroad by urgent buiincfs, and 
 took Ills leave. 
 
 H 3 Uow 
 

<#PG# 160>
i50~ The HISTORY of 
 
 How much it rejoiced the finccrcly devoted heart 
 of Mr. 7'rueworth, to find himfelf once more alone 
 with the idol of his wifhcs, may eafily be conceiv- 
 ed by thofc who have had any experience of the 
 
 painon he fo deeply felt ; but his felicity was of " 
 
 a fliort continuance, and he profited but little by the 
 complaifancc of Mr. Goodman. 
 
 He was but jufl: beginning to pour forth fome 
 part of thofe tender fentimcnts, with which his foul 
 overflowed, when he was prevented from proceed- 
 ing, by afccond interruption, much more difagrce- 
 able than the former had been. 
 
 Mr, Staple, and captain Hyfum, for wlicm MiGi 
 Betfy had not left the lame ordert^ fhe had done tha 
 day before, came both to vifit her : the former had 
 the advantage in being there fomewhat fooner than 
 tiie other, and accolkd her with an air, whicb 
 made the enamoured heart of Mr. Trueworth im- 
 mediately beat an alarm to jealoufy. Mr. Staple, 
 v;ho had ktw him there once before, when he 
 brought her brother's letter to her, did not prefent- 
 \y know him for his rival, nor imagined he had any 
 other intent in his vifits, than ta i>ay his compli- 
 ments to the filler of his friend. 
 . l^iiey were all three engaged in a converfation^ 
 which had nothing particular in it, when Mifa 
 Bctfy was told captain Hyfom defired to fpeak with 
 her ; on which jfilie bid the fellow dcfire him to walk 
 in. " He is in the back parlour, madam," replied 
 Jie ; " I told him you had company, fo he defires 
 V you v/ill come to him there ; for he fays he has 
 *' great bufineG with you, and muft needs fpeak 
 *« with you." Both Mifs Betfy and Mr. Staple 
 iaughed immoderately at this mefTage ; but Mr. 
 Trueworth, who was not in the fecret, looked a 
 little grave, as not knowing what to think of it. 
 " You would fcarce believe. Sir," faid Mr. Staple. 
 .S9 hiiii, '* that this embaily came from the court 
 
 " 
 

<#PG# 161>
M//'} Betsy Thoughtless. 151 
 •^ of Cupid, yet I aiTure you the captain is one ot 
 " this lady's moft paflionate admirers."— *' Yes, 
 " indeed," added Mifs Betiy, '' and threatens ter- 
 •' rible things to every one, who' {hould. dare to 
 
 *« difputetheconqucfl: of my heart with him ; 
 
 " but go,!' continued flie, to the footm.an, *' tell 
 " him, I have friends with me v> horn 1 cannot be 
 •' (o rude to leave, and that I infift on his giving us 
 •' his company in this room." 
 
 The captain on this was prevailed upon to coma 
 in, though not very well pleafed at finding him- 
 fclf obliged to do fb, by the pofitivc commands of 
 
 his miftrefs. He paid his rcfpc^s, however, in 
 
 bis blunt manner to the gentlemen, as well as iMifs 
 Betfy, and having drawn his chair as near her as he 
 could, *' I hoped, madam," faid he, " you would 
 *' have found an opportunity of fpeaking to me 
 *'• before now : — you mud: needs tliink I am a little 
 •' uneafy till I know what I have to dcpci^d upon." 
 -^'' Blefs mc, Sir," crie-d (he, *' you talk in an 
 *' odd maiiner!"' — ajvd then, continued Ihc, poi!U-» 
 ing to Mr. Trueworlh, " ihis gcn'ieman here, who 
 *' is a friend of my brother's, will think,- I have 
 '' out- run my income, and that you come to dun 
 •' me for money borrowed of you." — '* No, no," 
 aiifwercd he, '' as to that you owe mc nothing but 
 *' good-will, — and that I think I deferve for' t'.i^; 
 " refpetSl 1 have for you, if it were for nothing, 
 •' clfe j but, madam, I fhould be glad to know 
 "*' fome anfwer to the bufmefs I wrote to you up- 
 t« on." — Lord, Sir !" replied fhe, " I have not 
 «' yet had time to think upon it, — much kfs to 
 *' refolve on any thing." — " That is ftrange," re- 
 turned he, '' why you have had three days, and furc 
 " that is longenoKghto think and rcfolve too, 00 
 ** any thing. ^—" Not for me indeed, captain, an- 
 •' iweied flie, laughing ; — but come, here are juit 
 H 4 " fou5 
 

<#PG# 162>
752 r/:^<f H 1 S TO R Y cf 
 
 '* four of us, — what think you, gentlemen, of a. 
 
 *■' pime of quadrille to kill time ?" 
 
 Mr. Trueworth and Mr. Staple told her at once, 
 that they approved the motion, and (lie was juff 
 going to call for the cards and fifties, when the cap- 
 tain flopped her, faying, *' I never loved play in 
 *' my life, and have no time to kill as mayhap thefe 
 ^* gentlemen have, who, 'tis likely have nothing 
 *' e!fc to do than to drefs and vifit \- — I have a 
 *' great deal of bufinefs upon my hands, — the {hip 
 *• IS taking in her lading, and I do not know but- 
 ^' we may fail in fix or {qvcu weeks, fo mufl de- 
 '* hre you would fix a day for us to be alone to- 
 *' gcther, that I may know at once what it is you 
 *^ defign to do."-- — " Fye, captain !" replied- 
 ihe, " how can vou think of fuch a thing ? — I af- 
 '*• fure you., Sir," added ft] e, with an- affedcd dif- 
 dain, " I never make appointments with gentle* 
 *' men." 
 
 That I believe," faid he, " but you fhould 
 
 confider that I live a great way off; — *tis a long 
 ' ' wafiC from Mile end to St. James's, and I hate- 
 '* your jolting hackney-coaches ; — befides I may 
 '* come and come again, and never be able to get 
 '* a Vv'ord with you in private, in an afternoon, and 
 *' all the morning I am engaged either at the In- 
 " dia houfe, or at 'Change j>— -therefore I fhould 
 " think itb better for bothof us not to ftand fhiily,. 
 " fhally ; but come to the point at once ; for 
 '' lookye, fair i'ady,.if we happen to agree, there 
 ** will be little enough time to fetde every thing, 
 *' as I am obliged to go fo foon."— >" Too little In 
 *' my opinion. Sir," anfwered fae, " therefore 
 " I think it is beft to defer talking any more of the 
 *' matter, 'till you come back." 
 
 " Come back, "cried he, " why do you confi- 
 *« der I ihall be gone three years."—*' Really, 
 ^' Sir," faid fhej " as I told you before I have ne- 
 
 

<#PG# 163>
Mlfs Betsy Tho-uchtless. r;^' 
 
 ** ver confidered anything abou tit, nor can pro- 
 "■ mife I {hould be able to fay any more to you at 
 *' the end of twice the time you mention, than I 
 *■* can do at prefent, which I afTure you is jud na- 
 '« thing at all." 
 
 Though both. Mr. Trueworth, and Mr. Staple, 
 bad too much good manners to do any thing that 
 might affront the captain, yet neither of them cou'd 
 ie(train their laughter fo well as to prevent fome 
 marks of the inclination they had for it, from being 
 
 vifible in their faces j and willing to contribute 
 
 fomcthing on their parts to the di\'erfion they p.r- 
 ccived {he gave herfelf, with a lover {o every way 
 unfuitableto her,— one told her, it was a great 
 pity flic did not confult tiie captain's convenience 5 
 
 the other faid, that it muft needs be a vaft f .rigue 
 
 for a gentleman, who was accaftomed onlv to walk 
 the quarter deck, to take a ilrctch of four Uiiles at 
 once ' — *' And all to no purpofe," cried he. that had 
 fpoken firf}, " pray, madam, give him his difpatch.'* 
 As little acquainted as the captain was with rail- 
 lery, he had underftanding en^r.igh to make him 
 fee, that IVLfs Betfy's behaviour t > him had rendered 
 him the jeft of all the company tint vifited her,- and 
 this Ire took fo ill, that all the liking he before had 
 
 to her was now turned into contempt. Finding 
 
 they were going on in the ironical v/ay they had 
 
 began, '* Lookye, gentlemen," faid he, with 
 
 a pretty flern countenance, " I would advife ycu 
 *' to meddle only with fuch things as concern your- 
 
 feives J you have nothing to do with me, 
 
 nor I with you. .If your errand here he as 
 
 I fufpe£l it is, there fits one v/ho I dareanfwcr 
 
 will find you employment enough, a? long as yon 
 
 (hall think it worth your while to dance atten- 
 
 d.;nce. As for you, Madam," continued he, 
 
 turning to Mifs Betfy, " T think it would havche- 
 
 \' corns you a3 v/cll, to have given me a more civ^l 
 
 ii 5 '' aiilvve;, 
 
 (« 
 
 (; 
 

<#PG# 164>
f5i: T^e IT I S T O R T #/ 
 
 *^ anfvvcr,— — if you did not approve of my pro- 
 
 *' pofals, you might have told nic fo at firft ;- 
 
 '' but I Ihall trouble neither you nor myfelf any 
 
 *' farther about the iTiatter.' -—I fee how it is 
 
 *' well enough, and when next I fteer for the coaft 
 '^ of matrimony, fhall take care to look cut for a 
 *' port not cumbered with rubbifh ; ' ■■ fo your 
 '' fervant." 
 
 As lie V/2S going out of the houfe, he met lady 
 Mellafinand Mifs Flora juft entering, being return- 
 ed from the ramble above-mentioned : they 
 
 law he was very angry, and would fain have pcr- 
 fuaded him to turn back, telling him, that if any 
 mifunderllanding had happened between him and 
 Mifs Betfy, they would endeavour to make it up, 
 
 and reconcile them. — To which he replied^ 
 
 that he thanked them for their love, but he had done 
 
 with Mifs Eetfyforgood and all; that fhe was- 
 
 no better than a young flirt, and did not know how 
 
 to ufc a gentleman handfomely ; faid, he 
 
 fliould be glad to take a bowl of punch with Mr. 
 Gcodman before he went on his voyage j but vvould- 
 iiot come any more to his houfe to be fcofFed at by 
 Mifs Betfy, and thofe that came after her. 
 
 Mifs Flora told him, that it was unjuft in him 
 to deprive her mamma, and herfclf, of the pleafure 
 of his good company for the fault of Mifs Betfy, 
 v/ho, fhe faid, fl'^e could not help owning was of a 
 
 very giddy temper. Lady Mellafin, to what 
 
 1-ier daughter had faid, added many obliging things^ 
 341 order to prevail on him, either to return, or re- 
 new his vifits hereafter ; but the captain was obfti- 
 natCjand perfifting in his refolution of coming there- 
 to more, took his leave, and Mifs Flora loft all. 
 hope of receiving any benefit from his being rej(.6t- 
 «d by Mifs Bel fy. 
 
 CHAFo 
 

<#PG# 165>
Mlfs Betsy THOUGFtTXEss. 15 
 
 5j- 
 
 C H A P. XTX. 
 Will make the reader little the wifer, 
 
 TH E greatefl part of the time, that Mr. True- 
 worth and Mr. Staple ftayed with Mifs Bet- 
 fy, v/as taken up with talking of captain Hyfom ;— 
 his paflion, — his behaviour, and the manner in which 
 he received his difmiffion, afforded indeed an ample 
 
 field for converfation : lady Mellaftn, and 
 
 Mifs Flora relating the anfvvcrs he had given thcniy 
 on their prefling him to come back, Mr. True- 
 worth faid, that it mud be owned, that he had 
 (hewn a ftrcngth of refoluiion, which few men irr 
 love could boaft of. 
 
 *' Love, Sir, according to my notions of that 
 *' paflion,'* replied Mr. Staple, *' is not to be felt 
 *• by every heart ; many deceive themfelvcs 
 
 *' in this point, and take for it what is in reality no 
 •' more than a bare liking of a beautiful object :--- 
 " the captain feems to me to have a foul, as well 
 '^ as form, cad in too rough a mouldy to be capa- 
 *^' ble of thofc refined and delicate ideas, which 
 ** alone conflitute and are worthy to be called 
 « love,'' 
 
 " Yet," faid lady Mellafin, « I have heard 
 *• Mr. Goodman give him an excellent charader,. 
 *' and above all that he is one of the beft-natured 
 
 *' men breathing." ^*' That may beindecdy 
 
 '' madam," refumed Mr. Staple, " and fome al- 
 ** lowances ought to be made for the manner ia 
 *•' which he has been bred ; though," added he, 
 *' I have known many commanders, uot only ot" 
 *' Indiamcn, but of other tra.':ing vefTels, who have 
 **^ all their life tiate ufed th^: feas, yet have knov/x> 
 
 « IlO'^- 
 

<#PG# 166>
156 ne HISTORY sf 
 
 •* how to behave with politenefs enough when oft'. 
 ^« (hore." 
 
 Mr. Trucwprth agreed with Mr. Staple, that 
 though tiie amorous declaration of a perlbn of the 
 taptain's-age, and fafhion of bringing up, to one of 
 IVdifs Betfy's, expofcd him to the dcferved ridicule 
 of as .many as knew it -, yet ought not his parti- 
 cular foible to be any reflexion on his occupation, 
 which merited to be held in the grcateft veneration, 
 -as the flrength and opulence of the nation was owing 
 to its commerce in foreign parts. 
 
 This was highly obliging to Mr. Staple, whofe 
 father had been a merchant, and Mr. Trueworth 
 being the firft who took Iiis leave, perceiving the 
 other flayed fupper, he faid abundance of handfome 
 things in his praife, and feemed to have conceived 
 ib high an efteera of him, that Mifs Betfy was di- 
 verted in her mind to think how he Vv'ould change 
 ]jis way of fpeaking, when once the fecret of his 
 jivalfhip fhould come out, as (he knew it could not 
 fail to do in a fhort time. 
 
 But as eafy as Mr. Staple was at prefent, on this 
 occafion, Mr. Trueworth was no lefs anxious and 
 
 perplexed : he was convinced that the other vi- 
 
 fited Mils Betfy on no other fcore than that of love, 
 iindit appeared to him equally certain, by the free- 
 dom with Vv'hich he faw him treated in the family, 
 that he was likewife greatly encouraged,, if not by 
 Mifs Betfy herfelf, at leaft by her guardian. 
 
 His thoughts were now wholly taken up with 
 the means, by which he might gain the advantage 
 over a rival, whom he looked upon as a formida- 
 "ble one, not only for his perfonal accomplifhments, 
 but alfo for his having the good fortune to addrefs 
 her before himfelf. All he could do wtis to pre- 
 vent, as much as poffible, all opportunities of bis 
 entertaining Mifs Betfy in private, till the arriv^Lof 
 JAr. Francis Thoughtlefsj from wiiofe friendfliip. 
 

<#PG# 167>
A///} Betsy Thoughtless. 15.7 
 
 and the influence he had over his fiftcr, he hoped 
 much. 
 
 He waited on hec the next day very early: — 
 Mr. Goodman happening to dine that day lat^r 
 :han ordinary, on account of fome frienJs he had 
 with him, and the cloth not being drawn, Mifs 
 
 Beify went and received him in anotiicr room.^ 
 
 Having this favourable opportunity, he immediately 
 began to prepare for putting into execution one of 
 thofe ftratagems he had contrived for feparating her 
 from Mr. Staple. After fome few tender fpecches, 
 he fell into a difcourfe concerning the weather ; 
 faid, he was forry to perceive the days (o much 
 ihortned, — that fummer would f<Ln be gone; and 
 added, that as that beautiful feafon could laft but.a 
 fmall time, the moft fhould be made of it: — '* I 
 *' came/* faid he, " to entreat the favour of you, 
 *' and Mi fs Flora, to permit me to accompany you 
 *' in an airing through Brumpton, Kennngton, 
 *' Chelfea, and the other little villages on this fide 
 <« of London.'* 
 
 Miis Bctfy replied, that (he would go v/ith all her 
 heart, and believed flic could anfwer the fame for 
 Mifs Flora, there being only two grave Dons, and 
 their wives within, v.'hom (liC would be glad to be 
 
 difengaged from j " but if not," faid flie, "I 
 
 " can fend for a young lady in tlie ni'ghbourhood, 
 " who will be glad to give us her company." 
 
 Shefentfirft, however, to Mifs Flora, who im- 
 mediately came in^ and the propofal being made, 
 accepted it with pleafure, and added, that (he would 
 afk her mamma for orders for the coach to be got 
 ready. — " It needs not, inadam," faid Mr. True - 
 worth, '' my fcrvant is here, and he fhall get one 
 
 *' from Blunt's r but Mifs Flora inf.ded on 
 
 their going in Mr. Goodman's, faying, (he Was 
 certain neitiier he nor her mamma would go out 
 

<#PG# 168>
cc 
 
 153 The HISTORY of 
 
 that day, as the company they had were come ^ 
 flay ; on which [vlr. Trueworth complied. 
 
 When (lie had left the room, " Ah! madam,'* 
 ••' faid he to Mifs Betfy, *«- could I flatter myfel6' 
 '* with believing I owed this condefcenfion to any 
 *' other motive than your complaifaiicc, to a perfon 
 *^ who has fome (hare in your brother's friendfhip, 
 
 *•' I fhould be bleft indeed ; but, ah ! I fee. I 
 
 have a rival, a rival dangerous to my hopes, 
 
 not only on the account of his merits, but alfo as 
 " he had the honour of declaring his paflion before 
 
 *^ me : the fortunate Mr. Staple," added he, 
 
 kifilng her hand, " may perhaps have already made 
 " fome imprei]icn on that heart I v/ould facrilicc 
 " my all to gain, and I am come too late.'* 
 
 ''• Rather too loon," replied fhe, fmiling ; 
 
 *' both of you equally too foon, admitting his fen- 
 •' timents for me be as you imagine; for I afiure 
 you, Sir, my heart has hitherto been entirely 
 my ov/n, and is not very likely to incline to the 
 reception of any guefl of the nature you mean, 
 
 for yet a long, long time. Whoever 
 
 thinks to gain me mufl: not be in a hurry, like 
 **■ captain Hyfom." 
 
 ^ Mr. Truew'brth was about to make fome paffio- 
 nate reply, when Mifs Flora returned, and told 
 them the coach would be ready immediately, for 
 {he hcrfelf had fpoke to the coachman, and bid him- 
 put the horfes to with all the hafte he could j «*n 
 which the lover exprefied his fenfe of the obligation 
 he had to her for taking this troublej in the politeft. 
 terms. 
 
 A perfon of much lefs difcernment than this gen- 
 tleman might eafily perceive, that the v/ay to be 
 agreeable to Mifs Betfy was not to be too ferious ; 
 
 ' he therefore aflumed aJl tlie vivacity he was 
 
 raadcr of, both before they went,, and during the 
 whole courfe of the little tour tiiey made,/ in which. 
 
 it 
 

<#PG# 169>
M'-fs Betsy Thoughtless. 159. 
 
 ft is not to be doubted but he regaled them with 
 every thing the places they pailed through could 
 furnifh. 
 
 The ladies were lb well pleafed both with their 
 entertainment, and the company of the perfon who 
 entertained them, that they Teemed not in hade to 
 go home, and he had the double fatisfaciion of en- 
 joying the prefence of his miftrefs, and of giving at 
 
 Jeaft one day's difappointment to his rival : he 
 
 was confirmed in the truth of this conjecture, when^ 
 on returning to Mr. Goodman's, which was not 
 till fome hours after clofc of day, the footman who' 
 opened the door told Mifs Betfy, that Mr. Staple 
 had been to wait upon her. 
 
 After this it may be fuppofcd he had a night of 
 much more tranquillity,, than the preceding one had 
 
 ■afforded him : the next morning, as early as he 
 
 thouglit decency permitted, he made a vifit to Mifs 
 Betfy, under the pretence of coming to enquire if 
 her health had not fuffered by being abroad in the 
 
 night air, and how £he had relied : (he received 
 
 him with a great deal of fprightlinefs, and replied,^ 
 file found herfelf fo well after it, as to be ready for 
 fuch another jauiit, whenever he had a fancy for it. 
 " I take you at your word,, madam," cried he, 
 tranfported to hear file anticipated v/hat became on 
 
 purpofe to entreat, " I am ready this moment 
 
 " if you pleafe," continued he, " and we will 
 '^ either take a barge, and go up the river, or a 
 *^ coach to Hampftead, or any of thofe places, jufi: 
 
 *'- to divcrfify tiiC fcenc 3 you have only to iiiy 
 
 " which you chufe." 
 
 She then told him, there v/as a necefHty of de- 
 ferring their ramble 'till the afternoon, becaufeMifs. 
 Flora v/as abroad, and. would not return till dinner- 
 time. '* As to what roate we rm.ll take, and e- 
 
 '* very thing belonging to it," faiJ ihcy. '' I leave 
 •"*- it eutirely to you y ■ I knov/ nobody has a 
 

<#PG# 170>
i6o Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 more elegant tafte, or a better judgment." • 
 
 I have taken care," replied he, *' to give the 
 world an high opinion of me in both, by mak-- 
 
 ing my addreiTes to the amiable A'lifs Betfy ; 
 
 but madam," purfucd he, '* fince we are alone, 
 will you give me leave to tell you how 1 have 
 
 employed my hours this morning." " Why, 
 
 " —in dreffing brcakfafting, and, pcr- 
 
 •' haps, a little reading," answered, fhe. " A 
 
 " fmall time, madam, lufEces for tlie two former 
 *' articles with me," refumed he, but I have indeed 
 
 " be/sn reading, ;• happening to dip into the 
 
 ** works of a poet, v;ho wrote near a century ago, 
 " I found fume words {o adapted to the fituation 
 " of my heart, and io agreeable to the fenfc of the 
 ** anfwer I was about to make yeflcrday to what 
 " you faid, concerning the perfeverance of a lover, 
 '^ that I could not forbear putting fome notes to 
 " ihem, which I beg you will give me your opi- 
 " nion of." 
 
 In fpeaking thefe words, he took a pieceof paper 
 Gut of his pocket, and fung the following ftar.za;i 
 
 *« "1^ H E Patriarch, to gain a wife 
 
 Jl " Chafte, beautiful, and young, 
 *' Serv'd fourteen years, a painful life, 
 " And never thought it lor^g. 
 II. 
 *' Oh ! were you to reward fuch caresj 
 
 '-^ And life fo long would ftay, 
 '* Not fourteen, but four hundred years, 
 *' Would Teem but as one day." 
 
 Mr. Trucworth had a fmc voice, and great fiiill 
 in mufic, having perfed^ed himfelf in that fcience 
 from the heft maifers, when he was in Italy, Mi^s 
 B-Ctfy was fachar.med both with the v/ordy and the 
 
 ilOtC£> 
 

<#PG# 171>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. i6i 
 notes, that (he made him fing them feveral times 
 over, and afterwards fet them down in her mufic- 
 book, to the end that flie might get them by heart, 
 and join her voice in concert with her fpinet. 
 
 Mr. Trucworth would not make his morning 
 vifit too long, believing it might be her time to 
 dYefs againft dinner, as fhc was now in fuch a defha- 
 billc as ladies ufually put on, on their firft rifing ; 
 
 ' fo after having received a fecond promifefrom 
 
 h«r of giving him her company that day abroad, 
 took his leave, highly fatisficd with the progrcfs he 
 imagined he had made in her good graces. 
 
 The wind happening to grow a little boifterous, 
 though the weather otherwife was fair and clear, 
 made Mr. Trueworth think a land journey would 
 be more agreeable to the ladies, than to venture 
 themfelves upon the water ; he therefore procured 
 a handfome livery coach, and attended by his two 
 
 fervants, went to Mr. Goodman's : the ladies 
 
 were already in expe(5tation of him, and did not 
 make him wait a moment. 
 
 Nothing extraordinary happening at this enter- 
 tainment, nor at thofe others, v/hich, for feveral fuc- 
 ceedingdays without intermiffion Mr. TruewortU 
 prevailed on his miftreis to accept, it would be fu- 
 pGifluous to trouble the reader with the particulars 
 of them. 
 
 Mr. Staple all this time was very uneafy ; 
 
 he had not feen Mifs Betfy for a whole Week, and 
 though he knew not as yet, that he was deprived 
 of that fatisfadion, by her being engroffcd by a ri- 
 val, yet he now began to be fenfible {l:ie had lefs 
 regard for him, than he had flattered himfelf he had 
 infpired her with j and this of itfelf was a fufficient 
 mortification to a young gentleman, vvho was not 
 only paflionately in love, but alfo could not, with- 
 out being guilty of great injuftice to his own me* 
 «its,^ bu.t think himieif not altogether unworthy of 
 
 fuccccding.. 
 

<#PG# 172>
i6t The HISTORY cf 
 
 njcceeding.— ►This however was ho more than a 
 flight fample of the inquietudes which the blind- 
 god fometimcs infli<5ls on hearts devoted to him, 
 as will kereafter appear in the progrel^ oi thi& 
 hiPiorv. 
 
 C H A P. XX. 
 
 Contains an odd accident^ which happended to MifS- 
 Betfy in the cloiftcrs of TVeftmifiJler-abbey, 
 
 MR. Trueworth, who was yet far from being 
 acquainted with the temper of the objetSt he 
 adored, now thought he had no reafon to defpait' 
 of being one day in pofTeffionofall he aimed to ob- 
 tain J it feemed certain to him, at leaft, that 
 
 he had nothing to apprehend from the pretenfion* 
 of a rival, who at firft he had looked upon as {<y 
 formidable, and no other at prefent interpoled between 
 him and hisdefigns. 
 
 Mifs Betfy, in the mean time, wholly regardlefs 
 of who hoped, or who defpaired, had no aim in 
 any thing fhe did, but meerly to divert herfelf, 
 and to that end laid hold of every opportunity that 
 offered. Mr. Goodman having cafually mentioned, 
 as they were at fupper, that one Mr. Soulguard 
 had juft taken orders, and was to 'preach his firft 
 fermon at Weftminfter- abbey the next day, (liQ 
 prefently had a euriofity of hearing how he would 
 behave in the pulpit ;——— his over modeft, and, a* 
 they termed it, (heepifli behaviour in company^ 
 having, as often as he came there, afforded mattei* 
 
 ef ridicule to her and Mifs Flora.— Thefe two 
 
 young ladies therefore talking on it after they were 
 in bed, agreed to go to the cathedraF, not doabting 
 but they flxould have enough to laugh at, and re^ 
 

<#PG# 173>
Mip Betsy Thoughtless. \6^ 
 
 port to all thofe of their acquairitance who had ever 
 fecn him. 
 
 What meer trifles, — what airy nothings ferve to 
 amufea mind not taken up with more efieniial mat- 
 ters ? Mifs Betfy was fo full of the diverfion* 
 
 fhc fhould have in hearing the down-looked hafbful 
 Mr. Soulguard harangue his congregation, that flie 
 could think and talk of nothing elfe, till the hour 
 arrived when flie fliould go to experience what (he 
 had fo pleafant an idea of. 
 
 Mifs Flora, w^hohad till now feemed as C2ger as 
 herfclf, cried all at once, that lier head ached, and 
 that Ihc did not care for flirring out: Aiifs Bet- 
 fy, who would fain have laugh.ed her out of it, 
 told her, file had only got the vapour?, — that the 
 
 parfon would cure her, and fuch like tliings— ^ 
 
 but the other was not to be prevailed upon by; all 
 Mifs Betfy, or even lady Mellafm herfeif, co\jld 
 iky, and anfwered, v.'ith fome fullennefs, that po« 
 fitivcly fhe would not go. — Mifs Betfy was highly 
 ruffled at this fudden turn of her temper, as it was 
 now too late to fend for any other young lady of her 
 
 acquaintaince to go with her ; refolving, never- 
 
 tlielefs, not to baulk her humour, fhe ordered a 
 chair to be called, and went alone. 
 
 Neither the young parfon's manner of preaching, 
 nor the text he chofe, being any way material to 
 this hiftory, I fhall therefore pafs over the time of 
 divine fervice, and only fay, that after it was ended, 
 Mifs Betfy pafling towards the weft-gate, and flop- 
 ping to look on the fine tomb, erefled to the me- 
 mory of Mr. fecretary Cragi^s, was accofled by- 
 Mr Bloomacre, a young gentleman who fometimes 
 vifited lady Mellafm, and lived at Weftminfter, in 
 which place he had a large eflate. 
 
 He had with him, when he came up to her, two 
 gentlemen of his acquaintance, but who were en- 
 Ure ftrangcrs to Mifs Betfv :— *' What," faid he» 
 
 ^' tlie 
 

<#PG# 174>
164 ne HI ST DRY cf 
 
 ** the celebrated Mifs Betfy Thoughtlefs ! 
 
 " Mifs Betfy Thoughtlefs ! the idoi of mankind ! 
 " alone, unattended by any of her train of admi- 
 *' rers, and contemplating thefe memento's of mor- 
 *' tality!" — " To compliment my underllanding," 
 replied flie, gaily, " you fliould rather have told 
 '* me I was contemplating the memento's of great 
 '^ a£lions." — *' You arc at the wrong end of the 
 " cathedral for that, madam," refumedhe, *' and 
 *' I don't remember to have heard any thing ex- 
 ''* traordinary of the life of this great man, whofc 
 " efiigy makes fo fine a figure here, except the 
 " favours he received from the ladies." 
 
 " 'Twere too much then to bedow them on 
 **■ him both alive and dead," cried flie, *' therefore 
 " we'll pafs on to fome other." 
 
 Mr. Bloomacre had a great deal of v/It .and vi- 
 vacity, nor were his two companions deficient in 
 either of thefe qualities j fo that between the three 
 
 Mifs Betfy was very agreeably entertained ^ 
 
 they went round from tomb and tomb, and the real 
 charaders, as well as epitaphs, fome of which are 
 flattering enough, aftbrded a variety ofobfervations. 
 
 ■ In fine, the converfation was (o pleafi:ig to 
 
 Mifs Betfy, that fhe never thought of going homCr 
 'till It grew too dark to examine either the fculpturc, 
 or the infcriptions ; fo infonfibly does time glide or;, 
 when accompanied with fatisfadion. 
 
 But nov/ enfued a mortification, which ftruck a 
 
 damp on the fprightlinefs of this young lady : • 
 
 file had fent away the chair which brought her, not 
 doubting but there would be others about the 
 church doors. She knew not how difficult it was 
 to procure fuch a vehicle in Wefi:minfter, efpecially 
 
 ©n a Sunday ; -—to add to her vexation, it rained 
 
 very much, and (lie was not in a habit fit to travel 
 on foot in any wcatlvsr, much Icfs in fuch as this. 
 
 They 
 

<#PG# 175>
M/j Betsy Thoughtless. 165 
 
 They went down into the cloifters, in order to 
 
 £nd fame perfon whom they might fend, either for 
 
 a coach or chair, for the gentlemen would have 
 
 been glad of fuch conveniencies for themfclves, as 
 
 well as Mifs Betfy : they walked round and 
 
 round fcveral times, without hearing or feeing any 
 body ; but at laft a fellow, who ufed to be em- 
 ployed in fweeping the chJrch doors, offered his 
 fcrvice to procure them what they wanted, in cafe 
 -there was a poflibility of doing it ;— they promifed 
 to gratify him well for his pains, and he ran with 
 all the fpeed he could to do as he had faid. 
 
 The rain and wind increafcd to fuch a prodigious 
 height, that fcarce wxis ever a more tempeftuous 
 evening.— Almoft a whole hour was elapfed, and 
 the man not come back, fo that they had reafon to 
 
 fear neither coach nor chair was to be got. 
 
 Mifi Betfy began to grow extremely impatient ;— 
 the gentlemen endeavoured al] they could to keep 
 
 her in good humour, " We have a good ftone 
 
 " roof over our heads, madam," faid one of them, 
 *' and that at prefent fhulters us from the incle- 
 *' mencyof the elements;" — befides," cried ano- 
 ther, " the ftorm cannot laft always, — and when 
 " it is a little abated, — here are three of us, — we 
 *' will take you in our arms by turns, and carry 
 
 " you home." All this would not make Mifs 
 
 Betfy laugh, and fhe was in the utmoft agitation 
 of mind to think what fhe fhould do, when, on a 
 'fudden, a door in that part of the cloiller which 
 leads to Little Dean's Yard was opened, and avery 
 young lady, not exceeding eleven years of age, but 
 •very richly habited, came running out, and taking 
 Mifs Betfy by the fleeve, " Madam," faid fhe, 
 *' I beg to fpeak with you."— -Mifs Betfy was fur- 
 prifed, but ftepping fome paces from the gentlemen 
 jto hear what (lie had to fay, the other drawing to- 
 •wards the door, cried, ** Pleafe, madam, to come 
 
 " in 
 

<#PG# 176>
i66 ne HISTORY of 
 
 ** in here ;" on which fhe followed, and the gen- 
 tlemen {tood about fomefoar or five yards diftant.— 
 Mifs Biidy had no fooner reached the threfhold, 
 which had a ftep down into the hall, than the young 
 lady took hold of her hand, and pulling her gently 
 down, as if to communicate what fhe had to fay 
 with the more privacy, a footman, who flood be- 
 hind the door, immediately clapped it to, and put 
 the chain acrofs, as if he apprehended fomc vio- 
 lence might be offered to it. Mifs Betfy was in 
 
 {o much confternation, that flie was unable to fytdk 
 one word, 'till the young lady, who dill had hold 
 .of her hand, faid to her, " You may thank hea- 
 " ven, madam, that our family happened to be in 
 
 " town, elfe I do not know what mifchief 
 
 *' might have befallen you," Blefs me," cried 
 
 Mifs Betfy, and was going on, but the other inter- 
 rupted her, faying, haftily, as Ihe led her forward, 
 
 *' Walk this way, my brother will tell you 
 
 <t all." Mifs Betfy then flopped fhort, " What 
 
 *' means all this ? faid (lie : where am J, pray, 
 " Mifs, who is your brother?" To which the other 
 replied, that her brother was the lord vifcount — , 
 and that he at prefent was the owner of that houfe. 
 The furprize Mifs Betfy had been put in by this 
 young lady's firll accofting her, was not at all diili- 
 pated by thefe words, but had now an equal por- 
 tion of curiofity added to it; -fhe longed to 
 
 know the meaning of words, which at prefent 
 feemed fo myRerious to her, and with what kind 
 of mifchief fh:; had been threatened, that fhe rea- 
 dily accompanied her young condu(5lrefs into a 
 magnificent parlour, at the upper end of which fat 
 the nobleman fhe had been told of,—'' I am ex- 
 tremely happy," faid he, as foon as he faw her enter, 
 *:' that providence has put it in my power to refcue 
 *' fo fine a lady from the villainy contrived againft 
 *« her." 
 
 i 
 

<#PG# 177>
M'lfs Betsy T^ioucHTLEfs. 167 
 
 Mifs Betfy replied, that flie (houIJ always be 
 lliankful for any favours conferred upon her, but 
 ijcfircd to know of what nature they weie, fcr 
 
 which (lie was indebted to his iordfliip : he then 
 
 told her, that the pcrfons flie had been with had the 
 
 iv.oft bafe defigns upon her ; that he had 
 
 heard, from a clofct window where he was fitting, 
 two of tliem lay the plot fcr carrying her off in a 
 hackney-coach ; and added, that being ftruck with 
 horror at the foul intention, he had contrived, by 
 the means of his fiilcr, to get her out of their 
 power ; — — *' For," faid he, *' I know one of 
 *' them to be fo bloody a villain, that had I gone 
 *' cut myfelf, I muit have fallen a facrifice to their 
 *' refcntment." 
 
 Mifs Betfy was quite confounded ; flic knew not 
 how to queft^ion the veracity cf a nobleman, who 
 could have no view or intcrell to deceive her, yet 
 it was equally incongruous to her, that Mr. Bloom- 
 acre could harbour any defigns upon her of that 
 fort his lordflVip mentioned :- --(lie had fcveral times 
 been in company with that gentlenvan, and he had 
 never behaved towards her in a manner which 
 could give her room to fufpe6l he had anv diflio- 
 nourable intentions towards her ;— — but then, 
 the treatment (lie had received from th.e gentleman- 
 commoner at Oxford reminded her> that men of 
 -an amorous complexion want only an opportunity 
 tofliew thofe inclinations which indolence, or per- 
 haps indelicacy, prevents thvm from attempting to 
 gratify by afTiduities, and courtOiip. 
 
 After having taken feme little time to confidcr 
 what fhe fhcuid fav, Pje replied, that fhe was in*- 
 finitely obliged to his lordfliip for the care he tcck 
 of her, but might be very well amazed to hear ihofe 
 geiUlemen had any ill' defigns upon her, tv.-o of 
 whom were perfect Grangers to her, and the other 
 often vifited at the houfc where ihe was boarded. 
 
 As 
 

<#PG# 178>
i68 ne HISTORY^/ 
 
 As for the fending for a coach, fhc faid it was by 
 her own defire, if no chair could be procured ^ 
 and added, that if his lordfhip had no other rea- 
 fon to apprehend any ill was meant to her, fhe 
 could not, without injuftice, forbear to clear up 
 the miftake. 
 
 Lord ■ was a little confounded at thefc 
 
 words, but foon recovering himfelf, told her, that 
 fhe knew not the real charader of the perfons flie 
 
 had been wiih ; that Bloomacre was one of 
 
 the greateft libertines in the world y that 
 
 though fhe might agree to have a coach fent for, 
 file could not be fure to what place it might carry 
 her, and that he heard two of them, while the third 
 was entertaining her, fpeak to each other in a man- 
 ner which convinced him the moft villainous contri- 
 vance Was about to be praflifed on her. 
 
 A loud knocking at the door now interrupted 
 
 their difcourfe ; both his lordfhip and his filler 
 
 feemed terribly alarmed, -air the fervants were 
 
 called, and charge given not to open the door upon 
 
 any account, to bar up the lower^ windows, and 
 
 to give anfwers from thofe above, to v/hoever was 
 
 there. The knocking continued with greater 
 
 violence than it began, and Mifs Betfy heard the 
 gentlemen's voices talking to the fervants, and 
 hough fhe could not diftinguifh what they faid, 
 tound there were very high words between them. 
 My lord's fifter ran into the hall to liftcn, 
 then came back, crying, " O what terrible oaths ! 
 
 <c 1 am afraid they will break open the door." 
 
 <c _ No," replied lord , " it is tooflrong 
 
 " for that 5 but I wifli we had been fo wife as 
 
 " to fend for a conflable." One of the fervants 
 
 came down, and repeated what their young lady 
 had faid ; adding, that the gentlemen fwore thev 
 would not leave the place, till they had fpoke with 
 the lady, who thay faid had been trepanned into 
 ' thaf 
 

<#PG# 179>
il'///; Betsy Thou Gil TLE*^.s. 169 
 
 that houfe: on this, " Suppofe, my lord,'* 
 
 iiiid Mifs Betfy, " I go to the door, and tell them, 
 
 " that I will not go v.'ith them." " No, ma- 
 
 '' dam," anrwered lord , *• I cannot con- 
 
 *' fent my door (liail be opened to fuch ruifians ; 
 " for, befides that they would certainly feize, and 
 *' carry you off by force, I know not what m.if- 
 *' chief they might do my poor men, for having; 
 '^ at fird refufcd them entrance/*- She then faid, 
 fhe would go up to the window, and anfwer them 
 from, thence i but he would not fuffer her to be 
 feen by them at all, and to keep her from ijifift- 
 ing on if, told her a great many llories of rapes, 
 and other mifchiefs had been perpetrated by Bloom- 
 ,acre, and thofe he kept company with. 
 
 All this did not give Mifs Beify thofe terrors, 
 which it is y^^xy plain liis lordfnip and filler endea- 
 voured to infpire her with, yet would flie fay no 
 more of appearing to the gentlemen, as flic found 
 he was fo averfe to it. 
 
 At length. the knocking ceafed, and one of the 
 footmen came down, and faid, that thofe who IiaJ 
 given his lordfhip this didurbance had withdrawn 
 from the door, and he believed were gone quite out 
 
 of the cloiders ; but this irftelligcnce did noC 
 
 fatisfy lord ; he either was,, or pretended to 
 
 be, in fear, that they were ftill fkulking in fome 
 c<?rner, "and would rufh in if they once faw the door 
 
 opened There was ftiil the fame difficulty aj 
 
 ever, how Mifs Betfy fbould get home ; -that is, 
 
 how fhclliould get f-fely out of tlic houfe, for tba 
 rain being over, the fervants faid they did not doubt 
 but they fliould be able to procure a chair or coach ; 
 after much debating on thia matter, it was tlius 
 contrived. 
 
 L had a window tliat looked into the yard 
 
 of one of the prebendary's, a footman was to 
 
 go out of this window to tl^e back door cfthji: re-. 
 ■ Vol. I. I vercrd 
 

<#PG# 180>
i^o "Tie HISTORY of 
 
 verend divine, relate the whole ftory, and beg leave 
 to go through his houfe : — this requeft being grant- 
 ed, the footman went, and returned in lefs than 
 half an hour, with the welcome news, that a chair 
 v/as ready, and waited in Collegc-ftreet.— Mifs 
 Betfy had no way of pafTing, but by the fame the 
 footman had done, which fhe eafily did, by being 
 lifted by my lord into the window, and defcending 
 from it by the help of fome fteps, placed on the o- 
 ther fide by the fervants of the prebendary. 
 
 It would be fuperfluous to trouble the reader 
 with any fpeeches ipade by lord ■ and his 
 
 fifter to Mifs Betfy, or the replies (he made to 
 them ; I (hall only fay, that pafling through this 
 houfe, and the college-garden, at the door of which 
 the chair attended, file went into it, preceded by 
 
 lord 's footman, mufHed up in a cloak, and 
 
 without a flambeau, to prevent being known, in 
 cafe die fliould be met by Bloomacre, or either of 
 his companions -, and with this equipage fiie arri- 
 ved fafely at home, though not without a mind 
 lirangely perplexed at the meaning of this adven- 
 ture. 
 
 CHAP. XXI. 
 
 Gives an explanation of the former^ ivilh cihcr par^ 
 tictdarsy more agreeable to the reader hi the repe^ 
 tiiion^ than to the perfcns concerned in them, 
 
 IT was near ten o'clock v/hen Mifs Betfy came 
 Iiome, and A4r, Goodman, who had been very 
 juineafy at her flaying out fo late, efpecially as flie 
 was alone^ was equally rejoiced at her return ; but, 
 ss well as lady M-llafm, was fiirprized on hearing 
 
 by v.'hat acccidcnt (he had been detained : they 
 
 Jciiew not how to judge of it^— there was no cir«^ 
 
 )C.un:)flance 
 

<#PG# 181>
Af//; Betsy Thoughtlts?. 171 
 cumflance in the whole affair, which could make 
 them think Mr. Bloomacre had any defigns of that 
 
 fort lord had fiiggeiled ; yet did Mr. Gocd- 
 
 man think himfelf obliged, as the young lady's 
 guardian, to go to that gentleman, and have fome 
 talk with him concerning what had pafled. — Ac- 
 cordingly he went the next morning to his houfe, 
 biit not finding him at home, left word with his 
 fervant, that he defired to fpeak with him as foon 
 as^pollible : — he came not, however, the whole 
 day, nor fent any meffage to excufe his not doing 
 {o, and this negkclgave Mr. Goodman, and Mifs 
 Betfy herfelf, fome room to fufpeft, he was no lefs 
 guilty than he had been reprefentcd, fincc had he 
 been perfcclly innocent, it Teemed reafonable to 
 them, to think he would have come, even cf liis 
 own accord, to have learned of Mifs Bctfy the m.o- 
 tive of her leaving him in fo abrupt and odd a man- 
 ner ', — but how much they wronged him will 
 prefently appear, and they were afterwards con- 
 vinced. 
 
 There was an implacable animofity between lord 
 ' and Mr. Bloomacre, on account of tlie 
 
 former's pretending 4 right to fome lands which 
 the other held, and could not be difpofTcfTed cf by 
 law. — As his lordfhip knew Mr. Bloomacre was 
 not of a difpofition to bear an affront tamely, he 
 had no other way to vent his fpleen againft him^ 
 than by villifying and traducing him in all ccmpa- 
 nics he came into ; but this he took care to do in 
 fo artful a manner as to be enabled, either to evade 
 or render what he faid impoffible to be proved, in 
 cafe he were called to an account for it. 
 
 The affair of Mifs Betfy, innocent as it was, he 
 thought gave iiim an excellcn!: opportunity of gra- 
 
 tifying his 
 
 ma 
 
 lice 
 
 ; — he went early 
 
 the 
 
 next 
 
 norn- 
 
 ing to the 
 
 dean, coir.phiiied cf 
 
 an 
 
 infu 
 
 itc.fi; 
 
 led to 
 
 his houlc 
 
 by 
 
 Mr. 
 
 Bloomacrc, 
 I 2 
 
 en 
 
 the 
 
 fcvic 
 
 crhij 
 fiHcr 
 

<#PG# 182>
172 ne H IS TO R Y c/ 
 
 filler having brought in a young lady, whom that ■ 
 gentleman had^ detained in the cloilters, and was 
 going to carry off, by the affiftance of fome friends 
 he had with him, in a hackney coach. 
 
 The dean, v/ho was alfo a bifliop, was extremely 
 inccnfed, as well he might, at fo glaring a propha- 
 nation of that (acred place, and the moment lord 
 » had taken his leave, fent for Mr. Bloom- 
 
 acre to cc-me to him, — That gentleman immedi- 
 ately obeying the fummons, the hifiiop began to 
 reprimand him in terms, which the occafion feem- 
 ed to require from a pcrfon of his fun6lion and au- 
 thority : — Mr. Bloomacre could not forbear inter- 
 rupting him, though with the greateft refpe<5l, fay- 
 ing nothing could be more falfe and bafe, thanfucfi 
 an accufation; — that whoever had given fuch an 
 information was a villain, and merited to be ufed 
 as fuch. — The Prelate feeing him in this heat, would 
 not mention the name of his accufer ; but replied 
 coolly, that it was poffible he might be wronged, 
 but to convince him that he was fo, he muft re- 
 late to him the whole truth of the (lory, and on 
 iN'hat grounds a conje6lure fo much to the difad- 
 vantage of his reputation had been formed : — on 
 vvhichi Mr. Eloomacre repeated every thing thut 
 had palled ; and added, that he was well acquainted 
 with the family where the young lady was boared, 
 and that hic was certain {lie would appear in nerfon ' 
 to jufiify him in this point, if his lordfhip thought 
 it proper' J — '' but,'' faid the bifhop, ^' I hear you 
 
 ^' affronted the lord , by thundering at his 
 
 *' door, and abufmg his fervants.''. — " No, my 
 
 ^^ lord," anfvvered Mr. Bloomacre, " lord , 
 
 f- though far from being my friend, will not dare 
 <« to alledge any fuch thing againff me.— We were 
 <S' indeed a little furpriz;ed to fee the young lady, 
 ^« who was with us, fnatched away in fo odd 4 
 ^' fafhion by his iiikr, who v/e eafily perceived • 
 

<#PG# 183>
Mffs Betsy Thou-gktless. tni^ 
 
 ^' had not the leaft acquaintance with her. — Wc 
 *' continued walking, however, in the cloiftcr, 
 *' till the man whom we had font for a coacli re- 
 ** turned, and toid us, he had got ^one, and that 
 *' it waited at the gate. — We then, indeed, knoclc- 
 *' ed at lord — — .'s door, and hcing anfwcrcd 
 *' from the '^'indows by the fervants, in a very 
 *' impertinent manner, I believe we m!£^,ht utter 
 *' fome words not very rerpcdiful, either of hia 
 " lordfii'p or his fifter, whole behaviour in t^MS 
 *' iiff./ir I am as yet intirely ignorant hov/ to ac- 
 " count for." 
 
 The bifhop paufed a confulerable time, but on 
 Mr: BIoomac're'6 repeating what he had iaid befor*.-, 
 concerning bringing the lady hcrfelf to avouch thcf 
 truth of wjiat he had related to his lordli ip, re- 
 plied, that there was no occafion for trouhluig ci- 
 ther her or himfelf any fi\rtfier ; — that he believed 
 there had been fome mi(lakc in the bufinefs', and 
 •that he >liould think no more of it ; on which Mr. 
 Bloomacre took his leave. 
 
 Though the bifliop had not mentioned tlie name 
 
 of lord to Mr. Bloomacre, as tlie pcrf^n 
 
 who had brought this complaint againfl him, yet 
 lie was very certain, by all circumdances, that he 
 could be indebted to no other for fuel) a piece of 
 low malice ; and this, joined to foipc other pro- 
 vocations he had received from the ill-will of that 
 jiobleman, made him rcfolve to do himfelf juf- 
 tice. 
 
 He went dire£lly from the deanery in fcarch of 
 the two gentlemen, who had been with him in the 
 abbey when he happened to meet Mifs Betfy, and 
 having found them botii, they went to a tavern 
 together, in order to confult on what was proper 
 
 to bdone, for the chaftifement of lord 's 
 
 folly and ill- nature, 
 
 I 3 . Both 
 

<#PG# 184>
J 74 Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 Both of them agreed with Mr. Bloomacre, that 
 he ou^iht to demand that fatisfadion, which every 
 geiulcman has a right to expert from any one who 
 has injured liim, of what degree foevcr he be, ex- 
 ccpiing thofe of royal Wood. — Each of them was 
 io eager to be his fccond in this afFair, that they 
 were obliged to draw lots for the determination of 
 the choice ; — he who had the ill-luck, as he called 
 it, to draw the ihortell: cut, would needs oblige 
 them to let him be the bearer of the challenge, that 
 h'j might at leaft have fome (hare in infiiding the 
 puiiifhment, which the behaviour of that unworthy 
 lord fo juflly merited. 
 
 The challenge was wrote, — the place appointed 
 for meeting was the field behind Montague houle ; 
 but the gentleman w4)o carried it brought no an- 
 fvver back, — his lordfnip telling him only that I^e 
 would confider on the matter, and let Mr. Bloom- 
 ?.cfe knov/ his intentions. 
 
 Mr. Bloomacre as the principal, and the other 
 as his fccond, were fo ctiragcd at this, that the 
 latter refolved to go himfelf, and force a more ca- 
 tegorical anfwer. — He did (o, and lord ■ hav- 
 ing had time to confult his brother, and, as it is 
 faid, fome other friends, told liim, he accepted the 
 ciiallenge, and would be ready with his fecond at 
 the time and place appointed in it. 
 
 Mr. Bloomacre did not go home that whole 
 day, therefore knev/ nothing of the mcflage had 
 been left for him by Mr. Goodman, till it was too 
 late to comply with it ; but this feeming remiffnefs 
 in hrm, was not all that troubled the mind of that 
 open and honeft-hearted guardian of Mifs Betfy.— 
 Mr. True worth and Mr. Staple had both been at 
 his houfe the day before :— the former on hearing 
 bis miftrefs was abroad, left only his compliments, 
 and went av/ay, though very much prefTed to come 
 in by Mifs Flora, who feeing him through the. 
 
 parlour- 
 

<#PG# 185>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 175 
 
 parlour -window, ran to the door herfelf^ and in- 
 treated he w^ould pafs the evening there ;— Mr^ 
 Staple came the moment after, and met his rival 
 coming down the fteps that led up to the door ;— - 
 Mr. 'iVueworth Ikluted him in pafling with the u- 
 fual complaifance, which the other returned in a 
 very cool mannei, and knocked haftily at the door, 
 " 1 imagine,'* faid he to the footman who opened 
 it, " that Mifs Betfy is not at home, by that gen- 
 " tleman's having fo early taken leave ; but I 
 " would fpeak with Mr. Goodman if he be at 
 " Icifure." 
 
 He was then fliewed into the back parlour, which 
 was the' room where Mr. Goodman generally rc- 
 eeived thofe perfons who came to him upon bufi- 
 nefs ;-— on beating who it was that aficed for him, 
 he was a little furprifed, and dcfired he would walk 
 up Oaiis J but Mr. Staple not knowing but thtFS 
 might be company above, returned for anfv/er, 
 that he had no more then a word or two to fay to 
 him, and that muft be in private ; on which th« 
 other immediately came down to him. 
 
 This young lover having by accident been in- 
 formed, not only that Mr. 7>ucworth made hl« 
 addrelles to Mifs Betfy, but alfo that it w;is with 
 him fhe had been engaged during all that time he 
 had been deprived of feeing her, thought it proper 
 to talk with Mr. Goodman, concerning this new 
 obflacle to his wiflies :---that v.'orthy gentleman 
 was extremely troubled to be queflioncd on an af- 
 fair, on which he had given Mifs Betfy his word 
 not to interfere, but finding himfelf very much pref- 
 fed by a perfon whofe paiTion he had encouraged, 
 and who was the fonof one with whom he had lived 
 in a long friendfhip, he frankly confcfTcd to him, 
 that Mr. Trueworth was indeed recommended to 
 Mifs Betfy by her brother ; — told him, he was 
 ibrry the thing had happened (oy but had nothing 
 I 4 farther 
 

<#PG# 186>
176 rie HISTORY^/ 
 
 farther to do with it j---that the young lady was 
 at her own difpofal, as to the article of marriage \ 
 — that he was ignorant how flie would determine, 
 Jind that it muft be from hcrfelf alone he could learn 
 vvliat it was he might cxpedl or hope. 
 
 Mr, Staple received little fatisfa6iion from what 
 Mr. Goodman had faid, but rcfolved to take his 
 advice, and, if pofiible, bring Mifs Betfy to fome 
 cclaircifement oi the fate he was to hope or fear. 
 — Accordingly he came the next morning to vifit 
 her : — a liberty he had never taken, nor would 
 now, if he had not defpaired of finding her in an 
 iiftcrnoon. 
 
 She gave herfelfj however, no airs of refentmcnt 
 on that account, but when he began to teflify his 
 cifcontcnt concerning Mr. Trueworth, and the ap- 
 prchenfions he had of his having gained the prefe- 
 rence in her heart, though the lail: who had folli- 
 cited that happinefs, fhe replied, in the mod 
 hauglity tone, that (he was furprifcd at the free- 
 dom he took with her ; that fhe v/as, and 
 
 ever would be, miflrefs of her adiions and fcnti- 
 ments, and no man had a right to pry into either ; 
 and concluded with faying, that fne w^as forry the 
 civilities (he had treated him with, fhould make 
 )iim imagine he had a privilege of finding fault with 
 thofe (he (hewed to others. 
 
 It is not to be doubted but that he made ufe of 
 all the arguments in his power to convince her, that 
 a true and perfect pafTion was never unaccompa- 
 nied v/ith jealous fears j— he acknowledged the me- 
 1 its of Mr. Trueworth; '* but," added he, "the 
 *' more he is pofTefTed of, the more dangerous is 
 " he to my hopes ;" — and then begged her to 
 ccnfider the torments he had fufFered, while being 
 f<.> long .deprived of her prefence, and knowing, at 
 ihe fame time, a rival was blefTcd with it. 
 
 Mif& 
 

<#PG# 187>
IvUfs Betsy Thougp.tless. 177 
 Mifs Betfy was not at this time in a humour ci- 
 ther to be perfuaded by the reafons, or foftened 
 by the fubmiffions of her lover, and poor Mr. Sta- 
 ple, after having urged all that love, wit, defi^air, 
 and grief could didlate, was, obliged to depart more 
 diiTatisfied than he came. 
 
 In going out, he faw Mr. Goodman in the par- 
 lour, Vv;ho gave him the good morning as he paficd j 
 — '' A fad one it hns been to mc," anfwcred he, 
 with fomewhat of horror in hi:> countenance ; *' but 
 " I will not endure the rack, of many fuch. 
 With thefe words he flung out of the houfe, in or- 
 der to go about what pcrhsps the reader is not at a 
 lofs to guefs at. 
 
 C H A P. XXII. 
 
 One duel hcgan^ and another fought in the fame 
 mornings on Mifs Betfy^s account^ arc here n- 
 lated^ ivlth the manner in which the different an- 
 iogonijls behaved to cazb other, 
 
 WE L L may the god of love be painted blind, 
 --» thofe devoted to his influence arc fcKJuni 
 capable of feeing things as they truly are i---ihe 
 fmalleft favour elates them with imac^inary hopes, 
 
 and the leaft coplnefs finks them into defpair j 
 
 their joys,--- their griefs,-— their fears more frc- 
 tjuemly fpring from ideal than efFed^ive caufea. — * 
 Mr. Staple judged not, that Mifs Betfy refufed to 
 cafe his jealous apprehenfions on the fcore of Mr. 
 Trueworth, becaufe it was her natural temper to 
 give pain to thofe that lo' ed her, but becaufe. {lie 
 had really an affe£lion for that gentleman j— look- 
 jng on. himfelf therefore as now abandoned to all 
 hope, rage and revenge, took the whole pofreiTi^n 
 I 5 of 
 

<#PG# 188>
i^S T/^^ HISTORY of 
 
 of his foul, and chafed away the fofter emotions 
 thence. 
 
 Having heard Mr. Trueworth fay he was lodged 
 in Pall-Mall, he went to the Cocoa- Tree, and 
 there informing himfelf of the particular houfc 
 where his rival might be found, fat down and wrote- 
 the following biilet : 
 
 ToCharl£s Trueworth, Efq> 
 
 *' Sir, 
 " T> O T H our wiflies tend to the pofleflion of 
 
 *' ±y one beautiful object; both cannot be 
 
 " happy in the accomplifhment ; it isfitthere- 
 
 *' fore the fword fhould decide the difference be- 
 " tween us, and put an end to thofe pretenfions on 
 " the one fide or the other, wliich it is not proba- 
 ** ble either of us will otherwife recede from. — «• 
 '' In confidence of your complying with tliis pro- 
 " pofal, I fliall attend you in the Green-Park, be- 
 *' tv/een the hours of feven and eight to-morrow 
 *•' morning ;— — as the affair concerns only our- 
 '* felves, 1 think it both needlefs and unjuft to en* 
 *' gage any of our friends in it, fo £hail come alonC;^ 
 *• aiid expert you will do the fame to, fir, 
 ** Your humble fervant,. 
 
 " T. Staple." 
 
 ?vlr. Trueworth was at home, and, on receiving 
 this, immediately, and without the lead hefita- 
 tion, wrote, and fent back by the fame meffenger, 
 the following anfvver^ 
 
 »' S.r^ 
 
 To T. Staple, Efq;, 
 
 T 
 
 HOUGH I cannot but think thedeclfi- 
 on of fcur.fate ought to be left entiulv to- 
 
 '*' tiic 
 

<#PG# 189>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 179 
 ** the lady herfelf, to whom, whatever be the for- 
 *' tune of the fword, it muft at Jaft be referred ; 
 " yet as I cannot, without being guilty of injuflice 
 *' to my own honour and pretcnfions, refufe you 
 " the fatibfadion you require, fliall not fail to meet 
 *' you at the time and place mentioned in yours, 
 *' till when^ I am. Sir, 
 
 " Your humble fervant, 
 
 " C. True worth/' 
 
 By the ftife of this letter it may be eafily per- 
 ceived, that Mr. Trueworth was not very well 
 pleafed with this combat, though the greatnefs of 
 his courage and fpirit would not permit him to har- 
 bour the leaft thought of avoiding it j yet what- 
 ever his thoughts were on this occafion, he vifitcd 
 Mifs Bctfy the fame day, and difcovcrcd no p:;iT of 
 
 them in his countenance, his behaviour, on the 
 
 •ontrary, was rather more fprightly than ufual ;-— 
 he propofed to the two voung ladies to go on fome 
 
 party of pleafure : Mifs Betfy anfwered, with 
 
 her accuftomed freedom, that flic (hould like it 
 very well ; but Mifs Flora, who had been for 
 three or four days paft very fullen and ill-humoured, 
 faid one minute (he would go, and the next that fhe 
 would not, and gave herfelf fuch odd and capricious 
 airs, that Mifs Betfy told her, flic believed her 
 head was turned ; to which the other replied, tart- 
 ly, that if the diftemper was catching, it would 
 be no wonder fhe fhould be infe6lcd, having it al- 
 ways (o near her. Mifs Betfy rc-plied, that fhe 
 
 knew no greater proof of madneTs, than to punifli 
 
 one's felf in the hope of mortifying another ; 
 
 *« but thatfhall never be my cafe,'* continued (he,- 
 
 •* as you will find," Then turning to Mr. 
 
 Trueworth, " if you will accept of 'my company, 
 «* without Mifs Flora," faid flie, laugb.ing, " we 
 ** will take a walk into the park."— —It is not to 
 
 be 
 

<#PG# 190>
,eo r>^f HISTORY ^/ 
 
 be doubted, but that the lover gladly embraced this 
 
 opportunity of having his miftrefs to himfelf. 
 
 *' 'Tis like Mifs Betfy Thoughtlefs," cried Mifs 
 Flora, " and only like herfelf, to go abroad with 
 
 *' a man alone." Mifs Betfy regarded not this 
 
 reproach, but catching up her fan and gloves, gave 
 Mr. Trueworth her hand to lead her v/here (lie 
 had propofed, leaving the other fo full of fpite? that 
 the tears guflied from her eyes. 
 
 'Tjs hkely the reader will be pretty much fur- 
 priftd, that Mifs Flora, who had always feemed 
 more ready than even Mifs Betfy herfelf, to accept 
 of invitations of the fort Mr. Trueworth had made, 
 fiiould nov/ all at once become fo averfe j but his 
 curiofity for an explanation of this matter muft be 
 for - while poflponed, others, for which he may 
 be equally impatient, requiring to be firfl dif- 
 cullcd. 
 
 l"wo duels having been agreed upon to be fought 
 on tlie fame m.orning, the refpeiSldue to the qua- 
 lity ofloid , demands we fnould give tiiat 
 
 whtrein he was concerned the preference in the re- 
 petition. 
 
 The hour appointed being arrived, lord — — 
 and his brother came into the field,— -Mr, Bloom- 
 acre and his friend appeared immediately after.- 
 
 *' Ycu are the pcrfons," faid lord — , in an 
 
 exulting tone, " who made the invitation, but we 
 
 '^ areihefirft at tabic." " 'Tis not yet paft 
 
 *' the time," replied Bloomacrc^ looking on his 
 watch, but the later we come the more eargerly 
 
 we fhall fall to. —In that inftant all their fwords 
 
 were drawn ; but they had fcarce time to exchange 
 (ine thruft before a pofTe of conftables, wiirh their 
 sfiifbnts, armed with {laves and clubs, rufned in 
 between them, beat down their weapons, and car- 
 ried them all four to the houfe of the high-bailifFof 
 Wtftmii,ftcr. ' 
 
 That 
 

<#PG# 191>
MifsBETSY Thoughtless. i8i 
 
 That gentleman, by virtue of his oince, made 
 a ftriil examination into what had pafTed, and hav- 
 ing heard v/hat both parties had to fay, feverely 
 reprimanded the one for having given the provoca- 
 tion, and the other for the manner in which it was 
 refented ; he told them, he had a right, in or- 
 der to prefcrve the peace of Weftminfter, and the 
 liberties of it, to demand, that they fl:iou]d find 
 furetics for their future behaviour, but in regard to 
 their quality and character, he would infift on no 
 more than their ov/n word and honour, that the 
 thing fhould be mutually forgot, and that nothing 
 of the fame kind, which nov/ had been happily pre- 
 vented, fhould hcrervfter be attempted. 
 
 Lord fubmitted to this injun^^ion wnth 
 
 a great deal of readinefs, and Mr. Bloomacre, fee- 
 ing no other remedy, did the fame, after which the 
 high-bailiff obliged them to embrace, in token of 
 the fmcerity of their reconciliation. » 
 
 Thus ended an afFair which had threatncd fuch 
 terrible confcquences. -It made however a very- 
 great noif:^, ai:d the difcourfe upon it was no way 
 
 to the advantage of lord '*s characSier, cither 
 
 for gcnerofity or courage. Let us now fee tl^ 
 
 fcquel of the challenge fent by Mr. Staple to Mr. 
 7'ruevvorth. 
 
 Thefc gentlemen met almoft at the fame time, 
 
 in the place the challenger had appointed : few 
 
 words fcrved to ufher in the execution of "tTie fatal 
 purpofe ; Pvlr. Staple only faid, *' Come on. Sir, 
 
 ** love is the word, and Mifs Betfy Thought- 
 
 " -iefsbe the vidtor's prize." With thefe words 
 
 h: drew Ms f'A'ord, Mr. Trueworth alfo drew 
 
 his, and {landing on his defence, feeing the othtr 
 
 .was about to puih, cried, " Hold, Sir I*-- ■ - 
 
 " your better fortune may triumph over my life, 
 /' but never make me yield up my prctenfions to- 
 *' tliat amiable lady :— — if I fall, I die her mar- 
 
 " tyr,. 
 

<#PG# 192>
i82 The HISTORY of 
 
 *' tyr, and wifli not to live but in the hope of ferv-- 
 
 ^' ing her." Thefe words making Mr. Staple 
 
 imagine, that his rival had indeed the greateft en- 
 couragement to hope every thing, added to the fury 
 he was before pofTeffed of, " Die then her martyr," 
 faid he, and running upon him with more force than 
 /kill, received a flight wound in his own breaft, while 
 aiming at the other's heart. 
 
 It would be needlefs to mention all the particulars 
 
 of this combat, I fliall only fay, that the too 
 
 great eagernefs of Mr. Staple gave the other an ad- 
 vantage over him, which muft have been fatal to 
 him from a lefs generous enemy ; but the tempe- 
 rate Mr. Trueworth feemed to take an equal care 
 to avoid hurting his rival, as to avoid being hurt by 
 
 hi in ; feeing, however, that he was about to 
 
 make a furious pudi at him, he ran in betv/een, 
 clofed with him, and Mr. Staple's foot happening 
 to flip, he fell at full length upon the earth, his 
 fvvord at the fame time dropped out of his hand, 
 
 which Mr. Trueworth took up. " The vidory 
 
 *' is yours,'* cried he, '^ take alfo my life, for I 
 
 " difdain to keep it." '« No," 'replied Mr. 
 
 Trueworth, " I equally difdain to take an advantage, 
 ** which meer chance has given me :-^ — rife, Sir, 
 *' and let us iinifli the difpute betv/een us, as bc'- 
 
 *' come men of honour."^ With thefe words he 
 
 returned him his fvvord. ' " I fhould be unwor-- 
 " thy to be ranked among that number," faid Mr.- 
 Staple, on receiving it, " to employ this weapon 
 " againft the breaft, whofc generofity ieftorcd it, 
 ** were any thing but Mifs Betfy at ILike ; ■ 
 
 •' but v/hat is life ! what is even honou! , with- 
 
 *' out the hope of her 1 1 therefore accept your 
 
 " noble offer, and death or coiiqucft he my lot !" 
 They renewed tlje engagement with crrcater 
 
 violence than before : after fevcral pafies, all 
 
 Mr. Trueworth's dexterity '^could not hinder him 
 
 from- 
 

<#PG# 193>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. iS^ 
 from receiving a wound on his left fide, but he gav& 
 ihe other, at the fame time, fo deep a one in his 
 right arm, that it deprived him, in an inftant, of 
 the power of continuing the fight ; on which Mr. 
 Trueworth dropping the point of his fword, ran to- 
 him, " I am forry, Sir," faid he, *' for the acci- 
 
 *' dent has happened j 1 fee you are much hurt, 
 
 *' ■ permit me to afTift you as well as I am 
 
 *' able, and attend you where proper care may be 
 
 *' taken of you." " I do not deferve this good- 
 
 *' nefs," anfwered Mr. Staple, " but it is the 
 '' will of heaven that you fliould vanquifli every 
 " way."^ 
 
 Mr. Trueworth then feeing the blood run quite 
 down upon his hand, ft ripped up the flceve, and 
 bound the v/ound from which it ifTued, as tight as 
 he could with his handkerchief, after which they 
 went together to an eminent furgeon near Piccadil- 
 ly. On examination of his wounds, neither that 
 
 in his arm, nor in his breafl, appeared to be at all 
 dangerous, the flefli being only pierced, and no ar- 
 tery or tendon touched. Mr. Trueworth fcem- 
 
 ed only affiduous in his cares for the hurts he had 
 given his rival without mentioning the leaft word 
 of that, which he had received himfelf, 'till an el- 
 derly gentleman, who happened to be with the fur- 
 geon when they came in, and had all the time been 
 prefent, perceiving fome blood upon the fide of 
 his coat, a little above the hip, cried out, " Sir, 
 " you negletSl yourfelf.— -I fear ycu have not e- 
 
 " fcapcd unhurt."^ A trifle,!' faid Mr, True- 
 
 worth, '* a meer fcratch, I believe:— 'tis time 
 
 " enough to think of that." Nor would he fuf- 
 
 fer the furgeon, though he bled very fa{>, to come 
 
 near him, 'till he had dene with Mr. Staple. 
 
 It was, indeed, but a flight wound, winch Mr. 
 Trueworih had received, though happenin^among 
 a knot of veins, occafioncd the effufion ol a pret- 
 ty 
 

<#PG# 194>
I Si. Ihe HISTORY cf 
 
 fy den) of blood ; for the ftoppage of which ihz 
 furgeon applied an immediate remedy, and told hirfi, 
 that it required little for a cure befides keeping it 
 from air. 
 
 Mr. Staple, who had been deeply aiFc6led with 
 the concern this generous enemy I'lad c^^prefTed fpr 
 him, was equally rejoiced at hearing the wound he 
 had given him would be attended with no bad coi;)- 
 
 fcqucnces. Every thing that was needful being 
 
 done for both, the old gentleman prevailed uppii 
 them to go with him to a tavern a few doors ofF, 
 having firft obtained the furgcon^s leave, who told 
 him, a glafs or two of wine could be of no preju- 
 dice to either. 
 
 This good-natured gentleman, v/ho was called 
 Mr. Chatfree^ ufed to come frequently to Mr. 
 Goodman's hoiife, had fome knowledge of Mr. Sta- 
 ple, and though he was wholly unacquainted with 
 Mr, Truev/oith, conceived fo great an efteem for 
 him, from his behaviour towards the perfon he had 
 fought v/ith, that he thought he could not do a 
 more meritorious aiSiion, than to reconcile to each 
 
 other tw^o fuch Worthy perfons. ^^What effect 
 
 ' his endeavours, or rather their own noblenefs of 
 fcntiments produced, Ihall prefently be fliewn. 
 
 C H A P. XXIII. 
 
 j^mong other things neceffary to he iold^ gives an ac' 
 count of the fuccefs of a plot laid by Mr, Chat- 
 free, for the difcovery of Mifs Beifys real in- 
 clinatiom* 
 
 '^ HOUGH Mr. Goodman had as yet no in- 
 
 jL timation of the accidents of that moruing^. 
 
 .yet was he extremely uneafy 5 — the looks, as well 
 
 as words of Mr. Staple, in gcing out of his houfe 
 
 the 
 

<#PG# 195>
l^lifs Be tsy Thought less. 1^5 
 the clay before, were continually in his mind, and 
 he could not forbear apprehending feme fatal confe- 
 quencc would, one time or other, attend the levi- 
 ty of Mifs Bctf3''s behaviour and conduct, in re- 
 gard to her admirers : he was alfo both furpriz^d 
 and vexed, that Mr. Bloomacre, from whom he 
 expeded an explanation of the Weilminfter-abybey 
 adventure, had not come according to his requeft. 
 
 This laft motive of his difquiet was, hovvevcr, 
 
 Toon removed : Mr. Bloomacre was no lefs impati- 
 ent to clear Ijimfelf of all blame concerning the 
 tranfadlions of that night, had no fconcr finifned 
 h.is affair with lord •—— -, and was cifmilTed by 
 the high-bailiff, than he came directly to Mr. Good- 
 man's, and recited to him, and all the ladies, the 
 whole of what had paffed. 
 
 Mifs Betfy laughed prodigioufly, but Mr. Good- 
 man fliook his head, on hearing the particulars re- 
 lated by Mr. Bloomacre^ and, after that gentleman 
 was gone, reproved, as he thought it h;s duty Xo 
 do, the inconfideratenefs of her conduct ; ■ he 
 
 told her, that as (he was alone, (he ought to have 
 left the abbey as Toon as divine fervice was ended ; 
 — that for a perfon of her fcx, age, and appearance, 
 to walk in a place where there were aUvays a great 
 concourfe of young fparks, who come for no other 
 purpofe than to make remarks upon the ladies, could 
 not but be looked on as very odd by all who faw 
 
 her. '' There was no rain," faid he, " till a 
 
 " long time after the fervice was ended, and you 
 '* might then, in all probability, have got a chair ; 
 
 *' or, if not, the walk over the park could not 
 
 *' have been a very great fatigue." 
 
 Mifs Betfy blufhed extremely, not through a 
 confclous fliame of imagining what fhe had done 
 deferved the Icaff rebuke, but becaufe her fpirit, yet 
 unbroke, could not bear controul :■ fhe replied, 
 
 that as (he meant no iil^ thofc who cenfured her 
 
 were 
 

<#PG# 196>
i86 rhHlSTORYcf 
 
 were moft in fault. " That is very true," an- 
 
 fwercd Mr. Goodman ; but, my dear child, you 
 " cannot but know it is a fault which too many 
 *' in the world are guilty of.— I doubt not of 
 " your innocence, but would have you confider, 
 " that reputation is alfo of fome value j — that the 
 " honour of a young maid like you, is a flower 
 *' of fo tender and delicate a nature, that the leaft 
 
 *' breath of fcandal withers and deftroys it. In 
 
 " fine, that it is not enough to be good, without 
 " behaving in fuch a manner as fliall make others 
 *' acknowledge us to be fo.'' 
 
 Mifs Betfy had too much underftanding not to 
 be fenfible what her guardian faid, on this occafi- 
 on, was perfe611y juil: ; and alfo, that he had a 
 right to offer his advice, whenever her condutSt ren- 
 dered it neceflary, but could not help being vexed, 
 that zny thing fl:ie did xhould be liable to ccnfure, 
 
 r.s die thought it merited none : {lie made no 
 
 further reply, however, to v»hat Mr. Goodman 
 faid, though he continued his remonilrances, and 
 probably v/ould have gone on yet longer, if not in- 
 terrupted by the coming in of Mr. Chatfree.— • 
 This gentleman having parted from the two wound- 
 ed rivals came dire6lly to Mr. Goodman's, in order 
 to fee how Mifs Betfy would receive the intelligence 
 he had to bring her. 
 
 After paying his compliments to Mr. Goodman, 
 and the other ladies, he came towards Mifs Betfy, 
 and looking on her with a more than ordinary ear- 
 iieftnefs in his countenance, " Ah, madam !" faid 
 he, " I fliall never hereafter fee you without re- 
 " mcmbering what Cowley fays of a lady who 
 *' might I fuppofe be like you : 
 "■ So fatal, and withal fo fair, 
 " We're told deftroying angels arc." 
 
 Tliough Mifs Betfy was not at that time in a 
 humour to have any great relifh for raillery, yst 
 
 (ho. 
 

<#PG# 197>
Afi-y} Betsy Thoughtless. 1S7 
 
 (he could not forbear replying to what this old gen- 
 tleman faid, in the manner in which (he imagined 
 
 he fpoke. '* You are, at leaft, paft the age of 
 
 " being deftroyed by any weapons I carry about 
 
 *' me/' cried fhe, " but pray what meaning 
 
 *' have you in this terrible fimile ?" "My 
 
 *' meaning is as terrible as the fimile," anfwered he 5 
 '^ and though I believe you to be very much the 
 *' favourite of heaven, I know not how you will 
 *' atone for the mifchief you have been the occa- 
 '^ fion of this morning ; but it may be," con- 
 tinued he, " you think it nothing that thofc mur- 
 " dering eyes of yours have ftt two gentlemen a 
 " fighting.;' 
 
 Mifs Bet fy, fuppofing no other than that he had 
 heard of the quarrel bctv/een Mr. Bloomacrc and 
 
 lord , replied merrily? " Pray accufe my 
 
 " eyes of no fuch thing, they arc very inno- 
 
 " cent I aflure you." — " Yes," cried Mr. Good- 
 man, and lady Mcllafin at the fame time, " v/ecan 
 *' clear Mifs Betfy of this accufation." 
 
 '' What ! " rejoined Mr. Chatfrec, haftily, 
 *' was not Mr. Staple and Mr. Trueworth rivals 
 
 *' for her love?" " Mr. Staple and Mr. True- 
 
 ** worth," faid Mifs Betfy, in a good deal of 
 conflernation, *' pray what of them ! " " Oh ! 
 " the moft inveterate duel," anfwered he, *' they 
 *' fought above half an hour, and poor Mr. Staple 
 
 ** is dead of his wounds. " " Dead ! " cried 
 
 Mifs Betfy, with a great fcream. lady Mef- 
 
 lafin and Mifs Flora feemed very much alarm- 
 ed ; but Mr. Goodman was ready to fink from hfs 
 chair, 'till Mr. Chatfree,-unfeen by Mifs Betfy, 
 winked upon him, in token that he was not inearn- 
 cft in what he faid. 
 
 The diftrac^ion in which this young lady now- 
 appeared,- * the concern flie exprefled for Mr. 
 
 Staple, and her indignation againft Mr. Trueworth,. 
 
 wou]d 
 

<#PG# 198>
i88 5^Z7^ H I S TO R Y ^/ 
 
 would have made any one think the former had 
 much ib.e preference in her cfteem, 'till Mr. Chat- 
 free, after having liftened to her exclamations on 
 tliis fcore, cried out on a fudden, *' Ah, madam, 
 *' what a miilake has the confufion I was involved 
 
 " in mad^ me guilty of. Alas ! I have deceived 
 
 " yOu, though v/ithout defigning to do (o, ■— 
 
 '* iVIr. Sta, Ic lives, -it is Mr. Trueworth who 
 
 *' has fallen a facrifice to Iiis unfuccefsful pafTion for 
 
 «; 
 
 " Truev/orth dead !" cried MifsBetfy, O God ! 
 and does his murderer live to triumph in 
 " the fall of the bcft and rnofi: accompliflicd m^in 
 
 *' on earth r ^Oh ! may all the mifeiies, that 
 
 " heaven and fortune can inflidl:, light on him ! — 
 *' Is he not fecured, Mr. Chatfree ?— Will he 
 '* not be hanged ?" 
 
 Mr. Chatfree could hold his countenance no 
 jonfTCT, but "buriling into a violent fit of laughter, 
 
 " Ah, Mifs Betfy ! -Mifs Betfy !" faid he, " I 
 
 *' have caught you ? — — Mr. IVueworth I find 
 " then is tlie happy man.' '■ " What do you 
 
 *' mean Mr. Ciiatfree ? " cried Mifs Betfy very 
 
 Jiiuch amazed.- " I beg your pardon," anfwer- 
 
 cd he, " for the fright I have put you in ; but be 
 *' comforted, for Mr. Trueworth is not dead I 
 " affure you, and, I doubt not, lives as mwch 
 '' your flave as ever."'— — ^' I do not care Wha:t 
 '« he is, if he is not dead," fiid Mifs Betfy ; 
 " but pray for what end did you invent this fine 
 " ftory ? " ' " Nay, madam," refumed he, 
 
 '^ it is not altogether my own inventing neither ; 
 " for Mr. Trueworth and Mr. Staple have had a 
 '' duel this morning, and both of them are wound- 
 " ed, though not fo dangero.ufly as I pretended, 
 *' mcerly to try, by the concern you would cx- 
 '' prefs, which of them you wef6 moft inclined 
 
 " to 
 

<#PG# 199>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 1^9 
 
 *^ to favour, and I have done iti'falth, - 
 
 *^ Mr. Trueworth is the man." 
 
 Lady Mellafin, who had not fpoke during all 
 this converfation, now cried out, " Aye, Mr. 
 *' Chatfree, we fliall foon have a wedding, I be- 
 *' Jieve." — " Believe^ madam," faid he, " why 
 " your ladyfliip may fwear it ; — for my part I will 
 not gi?e above a fortnight for the conclufion, — 
 and I will venture to wifli the fair bride joy on 
 the occafion, for he is a fine gentleman,' 
 a very fine gentleman indeed, and I think fhe 
 " could not have made a better choice." With thefe 
 words he wiped his mouth, and advanced to Mifs 
 Botfy, in order to falute her ; but pufliing him 
 fcoriifully back, " None of your flights, good Mr. 
 *' Chatfree," faid (he, *' if I thought you were 
 •' in earneft, I would never fee the face of Mr, 
 " Trueworth more." 
 
 Tiiis did not hinder the pleafant old gentleman 
 
 from continuing his raillery ; he plainly told 
 
 Mifs Bctu' that fhe was in love, that he faw the 
 
 marks of it upon her, and that it was in vain for 
 
 her to deny it. Lady Mellafin laughed very 
 
 heartily to fee the fret Mifs Betfy was in, at hearing 
 Mr. Chatfree talk in this manner ; but Mifs Flora, 
 to whom one would imagine this feene v/ould have 
 been diverting enough, never opened her lips to ut- 
 ter one fyllable ; but made fuch grimaces, as had 
 they been taken notice of\ would have (hewn hov/ 
 little fhe was pleafed with it. 
 
 Mr. Goodman had been fo much firuck wiih the 
 firft account given by Mr. ,Chatfree, that -he was 
 not to be roufcd by any thing that gentlem.an faid 
 
 afterwards ; he rcficclcd, that though the con- 
 
 fequeilces^of .the rencounter between the two rivals 
 had been Icfs fatal than he had been made to ima- 
 gine, yet it might have happened, and indeed been 
 naturally expected j he c^^uld. not therefore forbear 
 
 interrupting 
 

<#PG# 200>
igo The HISTORY of 
 
 interrupting his friend's mirth, by remonftrating to 
 Mifs Betfy, in the moft ferious terms, the great er- 
 ror (he was guihy of, in encouraging a plurality of 
 lovers at the fame time : he told her, that gen- 
 tlemen of Mr. Trueworth's and Mr. Staple's cha- 
 racler and fortune, ought not to be trifled with, 
 *' Suppofe," faid he, '* that one or both of them 
 <* had indeed been killed, how could you have an- 
 ** fwered to yourfelf, or to the world, the having 
 *' been the fad occafion ?" 
 
 '* Lord, Sir," replied Mifs Betfy, walking up 
 and down the room in a good deal of agitation, — 
 *' v/hat would you have me do ? — I do not want 
 *' the men to love me, — and if they will play the 
 '' fool and fight, and kill one another, it is none of 
 *« my fault." 
 
 In fine, between Mr. Chatfree's raillery, and 
 Mr. Goodman's admonitions, this poor young lady 
 was teized beyond all patience, and finding it im- 
 poffible to put a flop to either, fhe flew out of the 
 room, ready to cry with vexation. 
 
 She was no fooner gone, than Mr. Goodman 
 took Mr. Chatfree into his clofet, and having learn- 
 ed from him all the particulars of the late duel, and 
 confjlted with him what was proper to be done to 
 prevent any farther mifchief of the like fort, they 
 went together to Mr. Staple's lodging, in order to 
 ufe their utmofi: endeavours to prevail on that gen- 
 tleman to defift the profecution of his addrefles to 
 Mifs Betfy. 
 
 C H A P. 
 

<#PG# 201>
Afi/} Betsy Thoughtless. 191 
 
 CHAP. XXIV. 
 
 Will fails fy the reader s curiofity in fame points, and 
 increafe it in others* 
 
 THOUGH Mr. Goodman, under whofc care, 
 and in vvhofe houfe, Mifs Betfy had been 
 for upwards of a year, knew much more of that 
 young lady's humour and difpofition, than Mr. 
 Chatfree, who faw her but feldom, could poffibly 
 do, and could not be brought to think as he did, 
 that the merits of Mr. Trueworth had made any 
 eiFed^ual impreflion on her heart ; yet he imagined, 
 that to propagate fuch an opinion in Mr. Staple 
 would conduce very much to pcrfwade him to break 
 ojF his courtfhip, which was a thing very mlch de- 
 fircd by Mr. Goodman, as he was certain the con- 
 tinuance of it would be attended with almofl infur- 
 mountable difficulties, and create many vexations 
 and difputes, when Mr. Francis Tiieughtlefs came 
 to tovi'n. 
 
 The two old gentlemen went on together, dif- 
 courfing on this affair, 'till they came to the lodg- 
 ings of Mr. Staple, where they found him fitting in 
 an eafy chair, leaning on a table, with papers and 
 a ftandifli before him ; — they perceived he had been 
 writing, for the .pen was not out of his hand when 
 they entered the room : — he threw it down, how- 
 ever, as f^on as he faw them, and rofe to receive 
 them with a great deal of politene/s, though accom- 
 panied with an air, which, in fpite of his endeavours 
 to concciil it, difcovcrcd he laboured under an ex- 
 traordinary dejection of fpirits. 
 
 '* I am glad," faid Mr, Chatfree, pointing to 
 the pen, *• to fee you are able to n)ake ufe of that 
 *' v/enpon, as I feared your arm had been too much 
 '* prejudiced by another." — "I have found fome 
 
 *' diiliculty. 
 

<#PG# 202>
igz ne HISTORY cf 
 
 *' difficulty, indeed, in doing it," replied tha 
 wounded gentleman ; *^ but fomething. which feem- 
 *' cd to me a cafe of necellity, obliged me to cx- 
 *'' ert my utmoft eftorts for that purpofe." 
 
 After the firft-civiiities were over,, and they were 
 all feated, Mr. Goodman and Mr. Chatfree began to 
 
 open the bufinefs upon which they came;- Mr. 
 
 Goodman rcprefcnted to him, in the moft pathetic 
 terms, the deep concern he had been in, for having 
 ever encouraged his add relies to Mifs Betfy, and 
 cxcufed himfeU' for having done fo, by his ignorance, 
 at that time, that Mr. Trueworth had been previ- 
 
 oufly recommended by her brother ; he then 
 
 gave him fome hints, that the civilities Mifs Betfy 
 had treated him with, he feared, were rather owing 
 to that little vanity, which is^ generally the ccn»pa- 
 uion ciiyouth and beauty, than to that real regard, 
 v/nich his pafHon and perfon merited from her, and 
 hkU he heartily wifhed to iee him withdrav/ his 
 affections fro-m an obje6l, where he could not now 
 flatter him with the leail hope of a fuitable re- 
 turn. 
 
 *' No, no," cried Mr. Chatfree, interrupting 
 him hadily, *' you may take mv word, flie is as 
 *^ much in love, as a girl of her temper can be, 
 " with Mr. Trueworth, and I do not doubt but 
 '' you will all fee the effeds of it, as foon as her 
 
 *'• brother comes to town." Mr. Goodman, on 
 
 this, took an'opportunity of telling Mr. Staple, that 
 the afcendant that young gentleman had over his fi- 
 ii?.i% and the zeal he exprefied for the intereft of 
 his friend, would certainly go a great way in deter- 
 mining the point; and added, that if it were true, 
 ^.s hi'! frien-l {uggQ^iid^ that flic had really an inclina- 
 tion tor'Mr.:TrucworJ.h, flic would tlicn avov/ it, 
 and make a' merit of it to her brother, as if done 
 merely in rcfraidtg him. 
 
 ^ " - . Many 
 

<#PG# 203>
M//i Betsy Thoughtless. 193 
 Many other arguments were urged by thefe two 
 gentlemen, in order to convince Mr. Staple (f the 
 little probability there was of fucce.-ding with Mifs 
 Betfy, all which he liftened to attenti^^el), never in- 
 terrupting v/hat either of them faid, *til! percc-iving 
 they hi\d end?d alftbey had to ofFer on the fubjcd, 
 he m::f-c t^em t'ris reply. 
 
 " Gentlemen," faid he, " I am infinitely o- 
 *' bliged to you both for this vifit, and the friend- 
 *^ ly purpofe of it, which, I perceive, was to give. 
 " me that advice, which you might reafonably 
 
 '* think I wanted. 1 have heard, and I believe 
 
 *' have not loH: one word, at leaft, I am fure no 
 part of the meaning of what you have delivered : 
 ■I own there is great juftice In every thino- 
 
 <c 
 
 <(. 
 
 *' you have alledged, and am plcafcd to think the 
 ** arguments you bring are fuch, as, before your 
 " coming here, I had myfclf brcuglit' againft the 
 
 folly of my own unhappy paffion for Mifs Betfy ; 
 '' but, gentlemen, it k not that I am capable of 
 *' being deterred from profecuting it, by any thinw 
 *' I might have to apprehend, either to her own 
 *' inclinations, or her brother's perfwafions, but 
 *' for other reafons, which, at prefent, perhaps, 
 " you may be ignorant of, yet are fuch, :,s to con- 
 
 '' ceal I {hould but half be' juft. Be picafcd, 
 
 " Sir," continued he, addreffing himfejf to Mr. 
 Goodman, and giving him a paper, *' to read that 
 *' letter, and fee what my refolutions are, and the 
 " motives I have for them.'' 
 
 Mr. Goodman was beginning to look over the 
 paper, biit Mr. Staple requefted he would read it a- 
 loud, as he defired that Mr. Chatfree {hould be 
 partaker of the contents ; on which he read, with 
 an audible voice, thefe lines ; 
 
 A^OL. I. K Tm 
 

<#PG# 204>
194 ^•^-'^ HISTORY of 
 To Charles Trueworth, Efq; 
 
 *' WJ H EN I propofed the declfion of our fate 
 *' V / by force of arms, I offered, at the fame 
 " time, that the glory of ferving Mifs Betfy (hould 
 
 *^ be the victor's triumph.' This your too great 
 
 *' modefty declined ; but, Sir, though you 
 
 *' fcorned to accept the advantage your fuperior 
 ** fkill acquired, your generofity, in fpitc of you, 
 
 *' has gained. I loved Mifs Betfy, and would 
 
 *' have maintained my claim againll: all vi^ho (hould 
 •' hrive dared to difpute her with me, while ju- 
 **^ ftice, and while honour permitted me to do fo ; 
 '* but though I am unfortunr.te, I never can be 
 
 ** bafe. My life, worihlefs as it is, has twice 
 
 *^ been in your power, and I fhould be no lefs 
 *' hateful to my felf, than contemptible to the 
 *' world, fhould I offer to interrupt the peace of 
 *' him that gave it.' May you be as fuccefsful in 
 ** love as you have been in fight, and the amiable 
 *' obje(Si be convinced of her own happinefs in 
 *' making yours. ■ I defjft for ever from the vain 
 *' hopes I once was flattered with, and the firft 
 ** Wifh my foul now harbours, is to be worthy 
 *•• the title of your friend, as I am bound to avow 
 *' myfelf, 
 
 << With the greateft fmcerity, 
 Sir, 
 ** Your mofl obliged, 
 
 " And moil humble fervant, 
 
 " T. Staple/' 
 
 ^* Nothing," faid Mr. Goodman, as foon as he. 
 |iad done reading, *' can equal your generofity, in 
 ** forming this refolution, but the wifdom in per- 
 <^ fiftin^ Til it 5 and if I find you do fo, iha41 have 
 
 ** more 
 

<#PG# 205>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 195 
 
 ^ more reafon to congratulate ydu upon it, than I 
 *' fnould think I ha " -^n the fucccfs of your wifbes 
 *' in marrying Mifs Betfy," 
 
 *' I fhould laugh now, *' cried Mr. ChatFree, 
 ** if Mr. Trueworth, in a fit of gcnercfit) too, 
 *' fhould alfo take it into his head to refigrt his pre- 
 *' tenfions, and choofe to wear the willow, iniKad 
 
 ** of the myrtle garland, becaufe you do fo." 
 
 *' He has already proved his generofity,'* — replied 
 Mr. Staple with a figh, whch he was unable to re- 
 flrain, " and has no need to give the fevere tclH- 
 *' mony you mention, if he is fo happy as you 
 ** fecm to think he is ;-- but," continued he, " it 
 *' is not my bufmefs to examine who )ields, or 
 " who purfues Mifs Betfy,— I am fixed' In my de- 
 *' termination of feeing her no more, and as fooa 
 ** as I am recovered from the hurts I have rcceiv- 
 ** ed on her account, will go into the country, 
 *' and fcek a cure in abfence for my unavailing paf- 
 *« fion." 
 
 Neither Mr. Goodman, nor Mr. Chatfree, were 
 fo old as to have forgot how hard it is for a youth* 
 ful heart to give up its darling wiQies, and facrifice 
 
 defire ta difcretion. They faid abundance of 
 
 handfome things, omitted nothing which they ima- 
 gined might add to the fortitude of his prefcnt way 
 of thinking. Pie, on the other hand, to take from 
 them all remains of doubt, concerning the fincerity 
 of his intentions, fealed the letter he had wrote tQ 
 Mr. Trueworth, and fent it to that gentleman^^ 
 while they were in the room. 
 
 Mr. Goodman was extremely pleafed in his mind, 
 that an affair, which, for fome time paft, had gi- 
 ven him a good deal of anxiety, was in fo fair a 
 way of being ended, without further mifchief : — • 
 he took no notice, however, on his return home, 
 at leail not before Mifs Betfy, of the vifit he had 
 i>«en making, or that he knqw any thing more of 
 K ^ Mr, 
 

<#PG# 206>
J96 TO^ HISTO R Y of 
 
 Mr. Staple, than wliat fhe had been told herfelf tjf 
 Mr. Chatfree, _^. 
 
 In the mean time, tnis young lady affedled to 
 appear more grave than ordinary : 1 fay, affect- 
 ed to be fo ; for as fhe had been at firft (hocked 
 by Mr. Chatfree's report, and afterwards teized by 
 his raillery, and then reprimanded, on the fcorc of 
 her condu(5t, by Mr. Goodman, fhe was not dif- 
 pleafed in her heart at the dangerous proof, which 
 the two lovers had given of their paflion. 
 
 She loft, however, great part of the fatisfadion 
 this adventure might have afforded her, for want of 
 a proper perfon to whom fhe might have talked 
 freely on it. — She had, indeed, many acquaintance, 
 in fomeof whom fhe, doubtlefs, might have con- 
 fided j but fhe did not choofe to be herfclf the re- 
 porter of this ftory to any one, who had not heard 
 of it from other hands ; and Mifs Flora, who knew 
 the whole, and was her companion and bed-fellow, 
 "Was grown of late fo fullcn and peevifh, as not to 
 be capable of either giving or receiving any diver- 
 .fion in difcourfes of that nature. 
 
 It is certain, that there never was a more afto- 
 iiifhing alteration in the temper of any one perfon in 
 fo .{liort a time, than in that of Mifs Flora : — — 
 her once gay and fpirituous behaviour, which, with- 
 out being a beauty, rendered her extremely agree- 
 able, was now become all dull and gloomy. 
 Inftcad of being fond of a great deal of company, 
 ihe now rather chofe to avoid than covet the focie- 
 ty of any one ;---fhe faid but little, and when fhe 
 fpoke, it was only to-contradidt whatever flie heard 
 alledged by others ; — -a heavy melancholy, mixed 
 with an ill-natured frown, perpetually lowered up- 
 on her brow : — in fine, if fhe had been a little 
 older, fhe might have fat for the pidure of Envy. 
 -.— Mif? Betfy, by being moft with her, felt jnofl 
 ith€ elleds of her bad humour j but as fhe thought 
 

<#PG# 207>
Mifs Betsy Thought less^ 197 
 
 fhe could eafily account for it, the fwectnefs of 
 her difpofition made her rather pity than refent the 
 change. 
 
 A young lirmcn draper, of whom lady Mellafm 
 foiiie times bought things, had taken a great fancy 
 to Mifs Flora, and not doubting but (he had a for- 
 tune in feme meafure anfwerable to the appearance 
 fhemade, got a friend to intercede with lady Mel- 
 lafm, for leave to pay his refpedis to her daughter : 
 -i — this being granted, he made feveral vifits at the 
 houfe, and was very well received by Mifs Flora 
 herfelf, as well as by thofe who had the difpo- 
 fal of her, 'till coming on the topic of foitune, 
 Mr. Goodman plainly told him, that having-, many 
 relations of his own to provide for, the mofl he 
 could fpare to Mifs Flora was five hundred pounds. 
 -—The draper's palTion was \QTy much damped, 
 on hearing his miftrefs's portion was like to be fo 
 fmall j— he told Mr. Goodman, that though he 
 was very much charmed with the perfon and be- 
 haviour of the young lady, and fliould be proud 
 of the honour of an alliance with fuch a familv, 
 yet as he was a young man, and but lately fet up 
 for himfelf, he wanted money to throw into trade, 
 and could not think of marrying without more than 
 three times the fum offered ;— he added, that a 
 young lady of her birth, and bringing-up, would 
 expert to live as ftie had been gjtrcuftomed, uhich 
 he could no way prom ifc {be (ho u Id do, widiout a 
 fortune fufficient to defray the expencc. 
 
 Mr. Goodman thought the reafons he gave were 
 very juft, and as he was unv/illing to ftretch his 
 hand any farther than he had faid, and was too ho- 
 ned to promife more than he intended to perform, 
 replied with the fame freedom that the other had 
 fpoke, that in truth he did not think Flora would 
 make a fit wife for a tradefman ;-— that the girl was 
 young enough, not ugly, and it was his opinion 
 K 3 that 
 

<#PG# 208>
<95 The HISTORY cf 
 
 that {be fliould wait till a more fuitable match 
 ihould ofter. In a word, Mr. Goodman's anfwer 
 put a final end to the courtfhip, and though Mifs 
 Flora affected to difdain the mercenary views, as 
 [lie termed them, of the draper, and never fpoke 
 ot him but with the utmoll: contempt, yet h^er 
 melancholy coming on foon after he had defi{le4 
 Ills addrelTes, made Mifs Betfy think (he had rca- 
 Ton to impute it to no other caufe ; and therefore^ 
 in meer compaiTion to this imaginary mortiiicati- 
 pn, was fo far from retorting any of thofe littl^ 
 taunts, and malicious inuendos, with which fhewas 
 continually treated by the other, that fhe took 
 ail the pains fhe could to alleviate the vexation 
 fhe faw her in, and footh her into a better hu- 
 mour. 
 
 The reader will probably think as Mifs Betfy 
 did, but the falfity of this conje<£^ure, and the cruel 
 return the good-nature of that young lady mej 
 v/ith, will in due time and place appear. 
 
 CHAP. XXV. 
 
 Co^ntains feme poffhges, whicb, perhaps^ may hf 
 ioakedupm as pretty extraordinary, 
 
 A CCORDING to the common rule of hoi- 
 JlSx nour among gentlemen, Mr. Trueworth had 
 certainly heliaved fo, as not to have either that, 
 or his good-nature called in queftion j but this was 
 not enough to fatisfy him :--- lie could not be 
 cafy under the rcflcdion, that the obligations he 
 had conferred gave a painful gratitude to the re- 
 ceiver. 
 
 He was deeply afFeded with Mr. Staple's letter ; 
 ---he doubted not but that gentleman in forcing 
 himfelf to refi^a his pretenuons to Mifs Betfy, 
 
 «iuft 
 

<#PG# 209>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 199 
 
 muft fufFer theextremeft agonies ; and heartily com- 
 miferating a cafe, which, had fortune (o decreed, 
 might have been his own, immediately wrote to 
 him in the following terms : 
 
 To T. Staple, Efq; 
 
 " Sir, 
 *' T AM afhamed to find the little I liave done fo 
 " X much over-rated, by a perfon, who, J am 
 " certain, is capable of the grcateft things ; but 
 '* fhould be involved in more confufion dill, (hould 
 ** any confideration of me, or my happintfs, prc- 
 " vail on you to become an enemy to your own. 
 " — I am altogether unacquair.ted with what kind 
 '* of fcntimcnts either of us is regarded by the fair 
 ** object of our mutual wi{lies.---It is highly pro- 
 ** bable her young heart may, as yet, be quite in- 
 ** fenfible of thofe we have endeavoured to infpirc 
 ** it with i-— for my own part, as I have yet no 
 " reafon to defpair, fo I have had alio but litilj 
 *' room for hope.-— You, Sir, liavcan equal cliancc-, 
 '* for zny thing I know, or can boall: ut to the con- 
 *' trary, and as you fav/ I rcfjfcd to hazard my 
 •' prctenfions on the point of the fword, ncitlicr 
 '' juPiice, nor honour, requires you fhould fur- 
 *' feit yours, though an accident gave mc the 
 
 '' advantage of you in the iicld 'Tis by Mi's 
 
 *' Bctfy hcrfcif our fate is to be juJc!:ed.---*Ti3 
 " yet a moot- point whether cither will fucceed in 
 *' the attempt of pleafrng her. \Vc mav, per- 
 ** haps, contend for an airy expe<51ation, while ano- 
 ** ther more fortunate fhall bear away the prize 
 ** from both ; but if one of us is decreed to be 
 *' the happy man, on which foevcr the lot fliail 
 •* fall, he ought not to incur the hatred of the 
 *« other. 
 
 K 4 «' Iclidiy 
 

<#PG# 210>
2C0 The HISTORY of 
 
 *' I gladly embrace the offer of your fricndfhip, 
 ** and whatever is the fortune of our love, (hould 
 " in tliat, as in all other events, endeavour to 
 ^^ prove, that lam, 
 
 ^' With an equal fmcerit)-, 
 ''Sir, 
 ** Your very much obliged, 
 " And mod: humble lervant,, 
 
 " C. Truevi^orth.'*' 
 
 Mr. Staple read this letter many times over, but 
 received not all the fatisfadion, which the author 
 intended it fliould give him, although he acknow- 
 ledged the generofity of his rival, yet he could not 
 conceive there was a pcffibility for a man in love 
 fo be cafy under the addreffes of another, u'ithout 
 knovviiig himfelf fecure of not being prejudiced 
 
 by them : Ij?, therefore, concluded that Mr. 
 
 Chatfree was right in his conjc^lure, and that Mifs 
 3ktfy only waited for her brother's coming. to town 
 to dccLre in favour of Mr. Trueworth. 
 
 This gentleman had a great {hare of fpirit, and 
 feme pride, and thefc making him difdain to pur- 
 fue a fruiilefs aim, and fuffering himfeif to be pub- 
 ]ickly overcome by Mr. Trueworth in love, as he 
 l^aJ been in fight, very much contributed to enable 
 hin to keep that refolution he had formed in the 
 pjefcrxe of Mr. Goodman and Mr- Chatfrec. 
 
 He ivnfvvertd M-r. Trueworth's letter, however,- 
 with the utmoPc complaifance, but w^ithout letting 
 him know any part of his intentions, in relation' 
 fo Mifs Betfy, fearing left any further conteft on 
 ihis iiflaij mig'it draw from that gentleman frefh 
 proofs cf a gciierofity, tow^hich, already, he look- 
 ed upon himfeif as too much obliged. 
 
 Mifs Betfy little fufpeiSiing what had paiTed be- 
 ^vv cen her too lovers, fince their meeting in the 
 G-rcen park, received Mr. Trueworth, -when he 
 
 came 
 

<#PG# 211>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtles?. 201 
 came to vifit her the fame day, as ufual, with a 
 
 great deal of good humour. She took not any 
 
 notice that fhe had heard of the duel, imagining, 
 that he would himfelf inform her of it, and he not 
 thinking it would become him to do fo, as having 
 had the advantage of his rival, 'tis probable there 
 would have been no mention made of it, if lady 
 Mellafin had not come into the room, and told him, 
 that fhe would not have broke in upon his co/iver* 
 fation with Mifs Betfy, if it had been pofTible for 
 her to have refifted the pleafure of congratulating 
 him, hot only on his fafety, but alfo on his coming 
 off vJdor in the field of battle. 
 
 The modeliy of Mr. Truewcrth would not fjf- 
 fer him to hear thefe laft words without blufhin'r ; 
 but foon recovering himfelf, " f'ortuiie, madam,'* 
 anlwered he, " is not always the mod favourable 
 
 ** to the moll: deferving : -her partial fmiles will 
 
 *' never make me vain^, or happy, unlefs," conti- 
 nued lie, looking tenderly on Mils Betfy, " fhe 
 ** woTjld add to her indulgence here, and give me 
 *' room to hope, my fervices to this lady might 
 '' one day be crowned v/ith the fame fuccefs, as 
 
 " (lie this njorning gave my fword." *' The 
 
 *' one,'' faid Mifs Betfy, fmiling, *' has nothing 
 *' to do with the other, and I do not know how 
 " to think a man, who really wiHies nothing fo 
 *' much as to appear agreeable in the eyes of his 
 *< miftrels, would run the hazard of making the 
 *' contemptible figure of a culprit at the bai^of a 
 *' court of Judicature." 
 
 They then fell into fome difcourfe on duelirng,aiTd 
 Mr. Truewort'i could not help joining with the la- 
 dies, in condemning the folly of that curtom, which, 
 contrary to the known laws of the land, and of- 
 tentimes contrary to his ovm reafon too, obliges the^ 
 gentleman either to obey the call of the perfon who 
 duJlengcs him to the field, or by refuilng^ fubmit 
 K 5 himfe]^ 
 

<#PG# 212>
202 "f^e HI ST OR Y of 
 
 himfclf not only to all the infuUs his adverfary is 
 pkafcd to treat him with, but alfo to be branded 
 with the infamous character of a coward, by all 
 that know him. 
 
 Noihiiig material enough to be related, happened 
 in this vifit, except that iVlifs Flora, who had been 
 abroad when Mr. Trueworth came, and returned 
 home a fmall time before he went away, talked 
 much more in half an hour, than ftie had done for 
 fome whole days paft j but it was in fo odd a man- 
 ner, fometimes praifmg, fometimes blaming his 
 conducl, in regard to the tranfaf^ions of that morn- 
 ing, that lie could not well determine in his mind, 
 whether {he was a friend, or an eremy to the 
 
 fucccfs of his puffion. Mifs Bctfy herfclf was a 
 
 iittle furprized, but nothing relaiing to that young 
 lady dwelt much up^in her mind, as (he really 
 thought (he had no defign in any thing fhe faid 
 _or did. --The behaviour of Mr. Staple ran much 
 more in her head ; fhe knew he was pretty much 
 wou Tided, and therefore might fuppofe him unable 
 to wait on her in perf^n, but having expcdeil he 
 would ftnd hk compliments to her, eith.cr by letter 
 or mtllage, ar,d finding he did neither the whole 
 day, it fee.med to her a thing too ftrange to be ac- 
 counted for :— — file was, however, eaftd of the 
 lufpence fhe was in, on that fcore, by receiving 
 from him, as fee was at breakfail the next morn- 
 ing, the following epiftle. 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Tpioughtless. 
 
 ^« A Brother's recommendation, fuperior mc- 
 " i\ rit, and your own inclination, have a-U 
 *■* united to plead my rival's caufe, and gain the 
 '* verdict againll: unhappy me ! --I ought more 
 ** early to have leen the vanity of attempting to 
 
 " fucceed;^ 
 

<#PG# 213>
(( 
 
 Mifs Betsy Thoughtless, io^ 
 *^ fucceed, where Mr. IVueworth was tlie candi* 
 ** date ; yet hurried by the violence ofmypaflion, 
 *' I ruflied into an action, which, by adding to 
 *' his glory, has (hewn my demerits in a more 
 confpicuous light than ever. 
 *' It would be needlefs to repeat what happened 
 *' yefterday ; I cannot doubt, madam, but you 
 " are wjH acquainted with all the particulars of 
 *' my folly, and the juft punidinient it met with. 
 " ---I have only to fay the generofity of my rival, 
 " and my conqueror, has rcftored me to my loft 
 '' reafon, and convinced me, that whatever pre- 
 *' ference he may be fo happy as to have gained 
 ** in your efteem, he is indebted for it to the ex- 
 *' ccllence of your good fonfe, and not that partial 
 ** faiicy which frequently mifguides the choice of 
 '* per funs of your fex and age. 
 
 *' I would have waited on you in pcrfon to take 
 my everlafting leave, but am not certam how 
 far I ou.:ht to depend on the (Irength <.>f my re- 
 
 folutiou in your prefence. Permit, therefore, 
 
 my pen to do that whicii m) tongue would faul- 
 
 ** ter in performing. Yes, madam, I muft 
 
 " forego, renounce for ever tliofe glorious expec- 
 " tations with which (o lately I flattered my fond 
 *' heart ;- -henceforth muft think on you as the 
 *' fallen father of mankind did on the tree of life : 
 " —-the merits of my too accomplished rival arc 
 " the fl.'.ming fwords which drive me from my 
 ** once hoped-for paradife ; and wh.ile I mourn 
 " my unhappy fate, compels me to own it to be 
 " juff.— Karewcl, O moft aimable of you fcx ! 
 *' Farev/el for ever! ---I have troubled you too 
 *' long, and have no excufe to make, but that it 
 *' is the laif vou will receive from me.— -May the 
 ■^* blefc guardians of the fair and good be your con- 
 **■ ftantdirtdorsj and fiiicld vou from all ills.--- 
 

<#PG# 214>
2(5^ The HISTORY of 
 
 ** bs adurerj that till I ceaic to cxifty I (haH not 
 •* ceafe to be, 
 
 *•■ With the finccrefl: gcod wilhes,. 
 *' Madam, 
 '' Yoixr moft faithful, 
 ** Though unfoi tunate, bumble fervanf, 
 " T. Staple, 
 
 Mils Betfy was afionifhed to that degree, en 
 reading ^o uiiexpected a declaration, that Ihe could 
 fcarce believe ihe was awake for fomc momentg, 
 and thought it all a dream ; (he broke off, and 
 made feveral paufes in the reading, crying ouf, 
 ** Good God ! — Is it polTible ?— What does the 
 '* man mean ?- -How came fuch fluff into h?s 
 ** head r — He is mad fure V^ 
 
 Mr. Goodman, who had. fome notion of whr^t 
 had pat her i-nto this ferment, and was willing to^be 
 mere confirmed, afked her, in a pleafant way, whr/t 
 had occafioned it ?— '-' Indeed, Sir," replied Mifti 
 Betfy,- endeavouring to compofe herfelf, ^' I have 
 *' been fo ct.nfounded, that I knew not w^here I 
 *' was, or who vvas in the room,— -I afk your par* 
 *' don, ---but this,. I hope will plead my excufe,'* 
 *' continued fhe, throwing the letter on the tabic-, 
 *' youf friend has given over his fuit to me, whirls 
 ** I am very glad of , but the motives, which he 
 *^ pretends oblige him to it, are fo odd and- capri- 
 *' cious, as not to be accounted for. '^ 
 
 *^ Given aver his • fuit," cried lady Mellafinj 
 haftily 5— -*■' O! praj, let us hear on what pre- 
 •* tenec ?" — On which Mr, Goodman read the 
 letter aloud, the very repetition of which renewed 
 Mi fs Betfy'a agitatiosis - -" He has a£ied," faid- 
 Mr. Goodman, as foon as- he had done reading, 
 *• like a man of i^tn^t and r^lolution, ami 
 ** I fee no caufc why you . (hould be diicon- 
 *' certed at the iofsof a lover, whofe pretenfions 
 
 6* you 
 

<#PG# 215>
iWi/} Bets \"; Thoughtless. 205 
 
 *' you did not defign. to favour."—" He was very 
 *' hafty, how^cver,'* cried Mifs Betfj, fcornfully, 
 *^ inconcludingfor me.-rt-Wbat did the man thinfc 
 " I v/as to be won ationce? — Did he imagine his 
 " merits were To extraordinary, that there required 
 *' no more to obtain, than barely to afk ? but I 
 " give myfelf no concern on that fcore, I afiure 
 *' you, Sir J — it is the infolence of his accufing 
 *' me of being in love that vexes me. — Who told 
 " him, I wonder f or, how came fuch a thing 
 ♦< into his head» that Mr-Trueworth had the pre- 
 *' ference in my efteem ? — By the manner in 
 " which he fpeaks of him in this letter, he has 
 ** found mor-e perfe£^ions in him, than ever I did, 
 *' and would make one think he were himfelf ena- 
 *•' moured of his rival's merits." 
 
 In anfwer to all this, he told her with a ferious, 
 air, that Mr. Staple was bound by all thofe ties, 
 which engage a noble mhid, to adt in the manner 
 he had dune j — that he had been twice indebted to 
 Mr. Trueworth for his life, and that the whole be- 
 haviour of that gentleman towards him, both during 
 thect-mbat, and after ft was over, demanded all 
 the returns that gratitude could pay. 
 
 He afterwards run into a detail of all the particu- 
 lars of what had pafi'cd between the two rivals, 
 many of which the ladies were ignorcjnt of before, 
 —•Lady Mcilafin joined with her hufband, in ex- 
 tolling the greatnefs of ibul, which Mr. True- 
 worth had fnewn on this occafion ; but Mifs Flora 
 faid little, and what fhe did was rather in praife of 
 Mr. Staple, — *' Mr. Trueworth," cried (he, " is 
 *' a fine gentleman enough, but has done no more 
 *' than what any man of honour would do j and, 
 *^ for m.y part, I think that Mr. Staple, in putting 
 " the felf-denial, he has rrow fhewn, in prectrcc, 
 *^ difcovers more of the hero and pliibfopheF, than 
 V. die other has done," 
 
 Tli« 
 

<#PG# 216>
■2o6 The HcIigT O R Y ^/ 
 
 The converfation,' on this topic, lafted fome 
 time, and .probably would not have broke ofF fo 
 foon, if it had not bcen^-fnterrupted by two young^ 
 Jadies Gomingi in to afk-- Mils Beify and Mifs Flora 
 ,4f they were, not for the park that morning? To 
 ^^vhich they having agreed, ^nd promifed to call on 
 them in their way, went up into their chamber, in 
 order to prepare themfeWes for the walk propofed. 
 — .•:r(i f:vy-3V 3£:t3 :• 
 
 CHAP. XXVI. 
 
 Difcovers to Mifs B^ify a piece of treachery Jhe 
 littk::i^pe.$t£dio hsar of. 
 
 MISS Flora, whoj had been deterred from 
 faying all.ihe had a mind to do, on the affair 
 between Mi!s iietfy's two lovers, now took this op* 
 portunityof givihg her. tQiigiie all the latitude it 
 wanted, Tliey were' n0 fooner come into the 
 chamber, than, ** Lord;, my dear," cried Ihe, 
 with a tone vaft'iy uiffere/Jt from, that, m which Ihe 
 had fpoke to her of iate, <^ how vexed am i for 
 " you !— It will ccrtainlygo all about the town, 
 " that you are in love with Tiuewortli, and there 
 '* v/ill h2 (uca cabals, and fach wifpering about it, 
 '* that you will be plagued to death :— -I cO'dd 
 ** tear him to pieces, methinks ; for I am fare he 
 " is a vaift Ivllow, and the hint mud firii come 
 " from himk>lf." 
 
 '* I never faw any thing like vanity in him," 
 leplicd Mifs B..tfy, "- and I am rather inclined ta 
 *' believe Mr. Staple got the notion from the idle 
 " rattle of Ml- Chatfree." -" Mr. CJiatfree,'* 
 faid Mifs Flora, *' thought of no fuch thing hini- 
 *' feif, 'till he had been at the tavern with Mr. 
 " Trucworth j but if I was in your place, I would 
 
 '• convince. 
 

<#PG# 217>
M//} Betsy TifOUQHTLts'^. 207 
 
 ^' convince Mr. Staple and the world, . that J u^s 
 *' not capable of the weaknefs imputed tome.".. 
 
 " Why, what would jou have me do ?" crifd 
 Mlfs Betfy.-— " I would have you vrite to Mr. 
 " Staple," anfwercd the other, " and let him know 
 •* the deception bis rival has put upon him."— -Mifs 
 Betfy, who had always an averfion to any thing of 
 this kind, and thought it too great a condefccjifion 
 to write on any fcorc to a man, who had pretended 
 love to her, flvjok her head at this propofal, and 
 exclaimed againft it with the utmoft vehemence. 
 
 Mifs Flora made ufc of all the arguments flie 
 could think on, to bring her off, frc-rn what ibe 
 called fo ill-judged a pride j---.among. other things, 
 fhe told her, that in compaflion to the defpair Ch^t 
 gentleman had fo feelingly expreffed in his Jettor, 
 ihc ought to give him the conlclalion of knc>wi{;g, 
 that if he had not gained fo far en her afft(Si^r.s v.s 
 he wilhed, it v/as not becaufe his lival h^d gr-in^d 
 more ; and added, that the ftep fhc perfvvadcd her 
 to take, was ftich, as common juflice to her o\^a 
 charatSter had a right to cxa6t from her. 
 
 Mifs Belf) heard, but was not to be prevailed 
 upon by all fhe could fay on this fubjcvSt ; but the 
 otlier, who had a greater fnare of ariiiice, than, 
 perhaps, was ever kr:ovvn in cne of hef }'t'ar^, 
 would not give over the defign (lie had fc rmcd jn 
 her head, and perceiving that ^lic. writing to a man 
 was the grcateft objcdion Mifs Hctfy had to letting 
 Ivlr. Staple know ihe was not fo much attached to 
 his rival, as he iniagincJ, took am.tlier way of 
 working her to her purpofe, wlfich fhe thought 
 would b'j lefs irkfome. 
 
 *' Well then, my dear Mifs Betfy," faid flie, m 
 the moft flattering accent, " I will tell you the 
 ^' only method you can take, and I am glaj I have 
 *' been fo lucky to hit i^on it :---you ihail j;.t me 
 " go,, and make Mr. Staple a vifit as of my ow n 
 
 '* accoid a 
 

<#PG# 218>
2oS Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 ' accord ;--• I fhall take care not to drop a fyllable 
 ' that may give him room to think you know of 
 ' my coming ; but yet as he may fuppofc I am 
 ' enough in your (ecrets to be miftrefs of thi?, or, 
 ' at leail, not altogether a ftranger to it, he will, 
 ' doubtlefs, hy foniething to me concerning the 
 
 * matter j but if hefliouid not, it will be eafy for 
 ' mc, in the way of difcourfe, and as it were by 
 ' chance, to exprefs myfclf in fuch terms as will 
 
 * entirely clear you, and rid him of all the appre- 
 ' henfions hers under, of your being in love with 
 ' Mr. Trueworth." 
 
 Mifs Betf'/ was not in her heart at all averfe to 
 Mr. Staple's having that eclaircifement Mifs Flora 
 had mentioned, and was much lefs fbockcd at this 
 propofal, than fhe had been at the former, offered 
 to her confideration for that purpofe ; yet did not 
 feem to come into it, till the other had lavifhed all 
 the arguments, that woman, witty and willful to 
 obtain her ends, could urge to prevail on her to do 
 fo ; and at laft confented not to the execution^ with- 
 out exacting from Mifs Flora the moll iolemn vow 
 of an inviolable fecrecj. 
 
 Thii project being concluded on, and every 
 thing relating to it fettled while they were 
 drefiing, they went together according to their prc- 
 mife to the ladies who expetSted them, and then ac- 
 companied them into the park ;-— but as if this was 
 to be a day of furprifcs to Mifs Betfy, fhe here mtt 
 with fomcthing which gave her, at leaif, an equal 
 fliare with that (he had received from the letter of 
 Mr. Staple. 
 
 I'hey had not gone many yards in the ?v/Iall, be- 
 fore they fluv three gentlemen coming towards them ^ 
 one of whom, as they drew nearer to each other, 
 Mifb Betfy and Mifs Flora prefently knev/ to b. the 
 fon of alderman Saving, though he vvas grown fat- 
 ter, more ruddy, ^iv^ ui majiy refpecU m^uch ifl- 
 

<#PG# 219>
M//} Be TSY Thought ttss. 209 
 
 tered from what he was when he vifited at Me. 
 Goodman's. 
 
 As our young ladies had not heard of this gentle- 
 man's return to England, it was natural for them, 
 efpecially Mifs Betfy, after what had pailed between 
 them, to be in fome little furprife at the fudden 
 light of him ;---he was in fome confufion too ; but 
 both parties had prefence enough of mind to recover 
 themfelves, fo as to falute as perfons would do, 
 who never had any thing more than an ordinary ac- 
 quaintance with each other. 
 
 After the civilities common to people, wh.o thus 
 meet by accident, Mr. Saving alked the lad cs leave 
 for himftlf and friends to join company ; which be- 
 ing readily granted, they all walked up thcMall to- 
 gether ;---but the place being pretty full, were 
 obliged to dcvidc themfelves, and walk in couples, 
 or as it happened. During this promenade, Mr. 
 Saving found an opportunity of faying to Mifs Betfy, 
 unheard by any of the others, •■' madam, I have 
 " fomething to acquaint you with, of great confe- 
 *' quence to yourfelf : --it is improper for me either 
 " to come or write to you at Mr. Goodman's, 
 *' therefore wifh you would appoint fome place 
 *' where I might fpeak to you.'^ 
 
 Mifs Betfy was very much ftartltd at his mentio- 
 ning fuch a thing, and replied, — " No," Mr. 
 *' Saving, I do not make a pra£Vice of confcntiog 
 •' to aflignations with men, nor have yet forgot 
 *' that which I confented to with you^--" I am 
 " very well able to clear myfelf of any fault on 
 '' that fcore." faid he, " but, madam, to eafe 
 *' you of thofe apprehenfions, which might, per- 
 *' haps, make you think yourfelf obliged to keep me 
 '^ at a diftance, it is proper to acquaint you, that 
 *' I am married, and that it is only through a friend- 
 *' ly regard for your honour and peace, that I 
 *' would warn you againft the perfidy of a pre- 
 
 '* tended 
 

<#PG# 220>
2IO n^HlST OR Y of 
 
 ■•' tended friend."— Perceiving (he flatted at thcfe 
 words, ajid repeated them two or three times over, 
 **« YtSf madam," refumed he, and if you will 
 ** permit me to fpcafk to you in a proper place, 
 ** will bring with me an unqueftionable proof of 
 *' the truth of what I fay." 
 
 One of the ladies happening to turn back to fay 
 fomething to Mifs Betfy, prevented him from ad- 
 ding further ; but what he had already fpoke, made 
 a very deep imprefTion on her mind ;---{he could 
 not conceive, who the falfe friend fhould be, that 
 he had mentioned, unlefs it were Mifs Flora ; but 
 though fhe had feen many inftances of her infince- 
 rity, was not able to form any conjeclurc, what 
 fhe could have been guilty of to her, that Mr. 
 Saving, who had been fo long abfent, could pofli- 
 bly be made acquainted with. 
 
 Thinking, however, that ihe ought not to deny 
 herfelf the fatisfadiori of the eclaircifement he offer- 
 ed, efpecially as it was now to be given, not by a 
 lover, but a friend, fhe fought and found a moment 
 before they left the Mall, of faying to him without 
 the notice of the company, " Sir, 1 have confider- 
 *' ed on the hint you gave me ;— -whatevtr con- 
 " cerns my honour, or my peace, mufl certainly 
 *' merit my attention :-"I have an acquaintance in 
 "•' St. James's palace, whom I will vifit as foon as 
 *' dinner is over ; if you walk a turn or two in the 
 *' gallery leading to the chapel- royal, you will fee 
 " me pafs that way between four and five o^clock.'* 
 To this Mr. Saving replied, that he would not fail 
 to attend her there. 
 
 Mifs Flora, who had been informed by Mifs 
 Betfy, after they had parted from Mr. Saving, that 
 he was married, was very full of the news when flic 
 came home, but Mr. Goodman, to whom the 
 whole ftory of tliat affair had been related by the 
 alderman, faid, that the young gentleman had done 
 
 very 
 

<#PG# 221>
M{f$ Betst Thoughtless. an 
 
 very wifely, in complying with the commands of 
 his /ather ; and added, that the lady had a very 
 agreeable perfon, a Jarge fortune, and, above ail, 
 was extremely modefl: and difcreet ; fo that there 
 was no room to doubt his happinefs.--- There was 
 /ome further difcou J fe at table, concerning this new- 
 wedded pair ; but Mifs Betfy took little fliare in it, 
 ^s giving herfelf no pain for the interefts of a perfon 
 for whom (he never had any thing but the moft per- 
 fect indifference. 
 
 She was, notwithflanding, impatient enough for 
 the account, (he expected to receive from him, and 
 withotit faying one word, either to mifs Flora, or 
 any of the family, where fhe was going, went at 
 the time pcrfixed to the place {he had appointed to 
 meet him. 
 
 Mr. Saving, to avoid being accufed of want of 
 purcSluality in the affairs of friendfhip, as he had 
 been in thofc of love, came fomewhat before his 
 time into the palace.— -As (he afccnded the great 
 ffairs file Aiw him looking through one of the win- 
 dows, waiting her approach, which greatly pleafed 
 her, as flie would not have thcught it proper to 
 -have walked there alone, nor would have been wil- 
 ling to have departed without the gratification of 
 that curiofity his words had excited in her. 
 
 Excepting the time of divine fervice, and when 
 the king, or any of the royal family go to chapel, 
 few places are more retired than this gallery, none, 
 befides the officers of the houfliold paffing on bufi- 
 nefs into fome of the apartments, fcarcc ever going 
 into it, fo that the choice Mifs Betfy made, in her 
 appointment with Mr. Saving, was extremely ju- 
 dicious. 
 
 As the bufinefs on which they met was of a na- 
 ture very different from love and gallantry, and time 
 was precious to them both, they needed not many 
 CQmpliments to ufher in what Mr, Saving had to 
 
 fay :. 
 

<#PG# 222>
212 ne HISTORY of 
 
 fay >- -he only, to cxcufe his behaviour to her, 
 while he had profefTcil himfelf her loverj waS be- 
 ginning to relate the fudden manner in which he 
 had been forced abroad ; but fhe flopped him from 
 going on, by telling him, fhe had heard the whole 
 ftory of that affair from Mr. Goodman, to whom 
 the alderman had made no fecret of it. 
 
 " I have only then," faid he, " to acquaint you, 
 *' madam, that foon after my arrival in Holland^ 
 *' looking over fome papers, that my father had 
 " put into my portmantua foj- my infl:ru£tion in 
 *' the bufmefs I was fent to negociate, I found 
 *' among them a letter, which, doubtlefs, in the 
 •' hurry he was in, he had fhuffled with the others 
 *' through miftake j-'-which, pray madam," con- 
 continued he, giving her a paper, " be pleafed to 
 *' perufe, and tell me whether honour and jyftice 
 ** did not oblige me to take the firft opportunity of 
 *^ cautioning you againft the bafenefs and malice 
 " of a p'rfon, you might otherv^ife, perhaps, con- 
 *' fide in, on matters of more confequence to your 
 *' peace, than any thing on my account could be." 
 
 Mifs Betfy ht.d no fooner taken the paper, and 
 looked or^ the fuperfcription, which was to alder- 
 man Saving, than fhe cried out, with great amaze- 
 ment, '' Blefs me .'---this is Mifs Flora's hand." — 
 •** I think," (iiid Mr. Saving, **- that I might fafely 
 *' venture to affirm it upon oath, having oft€n (tQn 
 *' her writing, and have even fome of it at this 
 *' inftant by me, in a fong fhe copied for me, on 
 
 *' my firfV acquaintance with her ; but read, 
 
 " madam," purfued he, " read the wicked fcroU, 
 ^' and fee the methods fhe took to prevail on a fa- 
 " ther to banifh from his prefence, and the king- 
 " dom, an only fon, and to traduce that innocence 
 *« and virtue which fhe hated, becaufe incapable of 
 *' imitating." 
 

<#PG# 223>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 213 
 
 On this, Mifs Betfy trembling, between a mix- 
 ture of furprizeand anger, haftiiy unfolded the let- 
 ter, and found in it thcfe lines, wrote in the fame 
 hand with the fuperfcription. 
 
 " Sir, 
 
 TH E real efteem I have for all perfons of 
 honefty and probity, obliges me to give 
 you this feafonable warning of the greateft mif- 
 fortune that can pofTibly befal a careful and a 
 tender parent, as I know you are j — but not to 
 keep you in fufpence,---your fon, Sir, — your 
 only,-— your darling fon !---that fon, whom you 
 have educated with fomuch tendernefs, and who 
 is To defervedly dear to you, is on the verge of 
 ruin :- "his unhappy acquaintance with Mr. Good- 
 man's family has fubjcdted him to the artifices of 
 a young girl, whofe little affairs arc in the hands 
 of that gentleman.---She is a great coquette,- -- 
 if I had faid, jilt too, I believe the injuf^ice I 
 (hould have done her character would not have 
 been much ; but as her fliarc, cither of fortune 
 or reputation, is very fmall, I cannot condemn 
 her for putting in pradtice all the ftratagcms in. 
 her power of fecuring to herfelf a future fettle- 
 ment by marriage,— -I fhould, Sir, only be forry 
 that the lot fhould fall upon your fon, as I know, 
 and the world acknowledges him to be a gentle- 
 man of much more promifing expc6lations.— -It 
 is, however, a thing 1 fear too near concludqd ; 
 —-he loves her to diftra(5^ion,---will venture every 
 thing for the gratification of his paffion : --- She 
 has a great deal of cunning, though little under- 
 ftanding in things more becoming of her fex;— 
 fhe is gay, vain, and pafTionately fond of gaming, 
 and all the expenfive diverfions of the tov.'n--— 
 A (hocking, and moft terrible compofition for 
 a wife ! yet fuch will fhe very fpeedily be made 
 
 '' by 
 

<#PG# 224>
214 ^'^^^ HISTORY of 
 
 by the poor infatuated Mr. SaTing, if you, Sir, 
 in your paternal wifdoni do not find fonie way 
 ** to put a ftop to his intentions.-— The original 
 of the picture I have been reprefenting is called 
 Mifs Betfy Thoughtlefs, a n^me well known a- 
 mong the gallant part of the town. 1 hope you 
 will take the above intelligence in good part^ as 
 it is meant, 
 
 " With the greateft fincerity, and 
 " Attachment to your interefts, 
 '' By, fir, 
 ** Your moft humble, 
 
 *' But unknD\vn fcrvant, 
 
 " A. Z. 
 
 *' P. S. Sir, your Ton is every day at Mr. Good- 
 '* man's, and if you v/ill take the trouble to 
 ** fet a watch over him, or fend any pcrfon to 
 '* enquire in the neighbourhood, it will be eafy 
 *' for you to fatisfy yourfeif in the truth of what 
 •* I have related." 
 
 The confleri'Jition Mifs Betfy was in, on reading 
 this cruel inve(31ve, was fuch, as for fome moments 
 deprived her from the power of fpeaking.'—Mr. 
 Saving could neither wonder at, nor blame {q juft 
 a refentment, yet to mitigate it in part, he confef- 
 {^6. to her a fecret, which, till then, fhe had been 
 wholly ignorant of. 
 
 *' Though nothing, madam," faid he, '* can ex- 
 *' cufe the crime (lie has been guilty of towards 
 '* you, yet permit me to acquaint you, that the 
 *•' malice is chiefly levelled againft me, and you 
 *' are only wounded through my fides." 
 
 *' How can that be ?" cried fhe, " flie does 
 ** juftice to your character, while fhe defames 
 *' mine in the moft barbarous manner."-— " Meer 
 *♦ artifice, madam," anfwered he, " to work my 
 
 " father 
 

<#PG# 225>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 215 
 
 *' father to her purpofe, as I will prererttly convince 
 « you." 
 
 He then told her, that before he ever had the 
 honour of feeing her, he had treated Miii Flora 
 with fomc gallantries ; " which," faid he, " her 
 ** vanity made her take as the addrefles of a ferious 
 •' paflion, 'till thofe (he found I afterwards made 
 *' to you, convinced her to the contrary,- --This, 
 *' madam," continued he, I am well affured of 
 *' by her laying hold of every opportunity to re- 
 ** proach my inconftancy, as fhe termed it; — 
 " finding how little 1 regarded all fhe faid to me 
 *' on that fcore, and ftill perfified in my devoirs ta 
 " you, fhe doubtlefs had recourfe to this moft 
 *' wicked ftratagem to cut me from all hope, even 
 " though it had been in my power to have inclined 
 *' you to favour my fuit." 
 
 Mifs Betfy found this fuppofition fo reafonable, 
 and fo conformable to the temper of Mifs Flora, 
 that fhe agreed with Mr. Saving in it. — She did not 
 now wonder at her wifhing to be revenged on him, 
 but could not brook with patience the method (he 
 took for being fo, and faid, that if Mr, Good- 
 man did not do her juftice ©n the author of fo 
 infamous a libel, fhe would immediately quit his 
 houfe, and chufe another guardian. 
 
 ** Hold, madam," faid he, *' I mufl intreat 
 " you will give me leave to remind you of the 
 " confequences that may poiTibly attend your taking 
 *' fuch a flep :— I own with you, that treachery 
 " and calumny, fuch as her's, cannot be to(j fe- 
 '^ verely expofed and punifhed j but, madam, con- 
 ** fider, that in order to do this, the accident which 
 *« brought the letter into m.y po/Teilion, and the 
 *' opportunity you have allowed me of prefent- 
 " ing it to you, mufl be made known, the lat- 
 *' ter of which you may be confident fhe would 
 *' not fail to make fuch rcprcfentations of, as would 
 
 " »ot 
 

<#PG# 226>
2 1 6 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 ^ not only hurt me, both with my father and -my 
 
 ^' wife, but alfo fu rnifh the malicious world, too 
 
 '' apt to judge by appearances, with fome pre- 
 
 " tcnce for calling a bkmiih on your own repii-. 
 
 ii 
 
 Thcfe remonflrances had fome part ©f the ef- 
 fe6l tiiey were intended for on the mind of Mifs 
 Betfy, -yet having an averfion to diflimulation, and 
 not knowing whether Ihe could be able to conceal 
 either her refentmsnt or the caufe of it, {he cried 
 out hafiily, without confidering what (he faid, 
 " Why then did you let me know the injury done 
 *^ me, imce it is improper for me to do any thing, 
 '< that might extort a reparation ?" 
 
 *' I could no^ madam," replied he, " behold yoa 
 ^* harbouring a fnake in your bofom without warn- 
 ^' ing you of the fting.— I am certain the eafing 
 '' you of my troublefome addrefles has been no 
 " caufe of mortification ; and it was not that you 
 <' fliould revenge what (he has already done, but 
 *' to put you upon your guard againft any thing fhe 
 " may hereafter attempt to do, that I refolved to 
 *' take the firft opportunity of letting you fee what 
 '' file was capable of." 
 
 Mifs Betfy was by this time fully perfuaded by 
 his arguments, but could not forbear complaining 
 of the difficulty it would be to her to look, or 
 fpeak civilly, to fleep in the fame bed, or behave 
 in any refpecStas {he had been accuftomed, towards 
 fo unworthy a creature :-— {he thanked him, how-' 
 ever, for his good intentions to her, iind before they 
 parted, promifed to follow his advice, if it were 
 only, as fhe faid, in confideration, that to a<5l in a 
 different manner might be a prejudice, to his dome- 
 ilic peace. 
 
 C H A P. 
 

<#PG# 227>
Mifs Betiy Thoughtless. 217 
 CHAP, xxvir. 
 
 Has very Utile in it, befides a colle.^ion of letters^ 
 fome of which ate much to the purpoje^ others 
 iefsfo. 
 
 Ml SS Betfy, after having taken leave of Mr. 
 Saving, went to the apartment of her friend, 
 where (lie flayed fupper, n^x bccaufe fliC was at 
 that time capable of being entertained, either with 
 the elegancies of the tablr, crthc company, which 
 happened to be pretty numerous ; but mecrly to 
 amufe and recover hcrfelf from' the iliock, whicii 
 the la^e difcovefy of Mifs Flora's infidelity had gi- 
 ven her. 
 
 On her coming home, flie found the family not 
 yet gone to bed, though it was then ncr.r one 
 o'clock-— Mr. Goodman was in high good humour, 
 and faid to her, " Mifs Bctfy you have loft fome 
 *' hours of contentment by being abroad,—- Mr. 
 *' Trueworth lias been here, and did us the favour 
 " to pafs the whole evening ^Aith us ; but that is 
 *' not all, --three letters have been left lfr}'ou,— - 
 ^' two of thtm came by the pofr, and are, I 
 " know, by the fuperfcnpti;ui, from Mr. Fiancts 
 " Thoughtlefs, and bdy Trufty : •— the other I 
 " am informed was leit for you by a poiter» but 
 
 " your curiofity muft wait for thcfe, 1 have 
 
 '^ ftill better news for you, — your eld.d brother, 
 
 " Mr. Thomas Thouq-hileis is com- '.a; home, 
 
 " I have received a letter from him, which tells 
 '' me, he has finifhed his tou^^ and we fhall foon 
 
 " have him among us. -Sec," continued he, 
 
 " what he f.ys." ^ 
 . ' In fpeakirtg thefc words, he took ihe letter but 
 of his pocket, and gave her to read :— it contiiined 
 thefc lines : 
 
 Vol. I. L - To 
 

<#PG# 228>
2iS The H IS TOR Y (/ 
 
 . To Mr. Goodman. 
 
 TVdythy Sir, 
 
 HAVE been for upwards of a month de- 
 tained on a party of pleafure, at the chateau 
 of monfieur le marquis de St. Amand, fo was 
 not fo happy to receive yours of the feventh, and 
 twenty-fecond inflant, till yefterday, when I re- 
 turned to Paris. 1 thank you for the long and 
 
 particular account you give me of thofe affairs 
 
 ' which are entrufted to your care. As to what 
 
 you tell me concerning my brother Frank's hav- 
 ing left the univerfity, I am not forry for it, nor 
 can at all wonder, that a young fellow of his 
 mettle {hould be willing to exchange the hopes of 
 
 * a mitre for a truncheon. 1 have not heard 
 
 ' from him fince I leit Florence, but believe it ow- 
 ^ ing to his Want of knowing where to direct for 
 ' me, my {lagcs afterwards having been pretty un- 
 ' certain ; but finding by yours that he is now with 
 
 * Sir Ralph Trudy, (liall accompany a letter I am 
 ^ obliged to fend to that gentleman, with one to 
 
 ' him. 1 forgive my filter's not writing when 
 
 ^ you did, as you gave me fome hints fhe is likely 
 
 * foon to become a bride :~ — -a matter, I confefs, 
 
 * fuffaient to engrofs the whole thouglits of a young 
 " lady ; be pleafcd to alfure her^ of my good wilhes 
 ^ in this, and all other events.*-— * As you fay (he 
 
 * has two very advantageous offers, 1 flatter my- 
 ^ k\f, through your good advice and infpedlion, fhe 
 
 * will take the beft. 
 
 ' In my laft, I mentioned fomewhat of a defign 
 
 * I had, to pafs a few months in the fouthern parts 
 ^ of this kingdom .; but I have fmce changed my 
 ^ mind, and am determined on returning to my na- 
 f tive country with all poffible expedition : ■ -I 
 
 * believe you inay expci^t me in three or four 
 
 ' weel;$ 
 

<#PG# 229>
Af//} Betsy Though TLE?;s. 2.f^ 
 
 * weeks at fartheft. If, Sir, you could within 
 
 * that time hear of a houfe, agreeably fituated, (ar 
 
 * my ufe, I fhould eftecm it as a confidcrablc addi- 
 
 * tion to the favours of our family, and myfclf in 
 
 * particular, has received from you fincc the death 
 
 * of our dear father. — I fhould approve of St. James's 
 
 * Square, if rents are not too exorbitant ; for in 
 ■* that cafe a houfe in any of the adjoining ftreets 
 
 * mufl: content me : — I would not v/illingly exceed 
 ' an hundred, or an hundred and ten pounds per 
 
 * annum ; but v/ould be as near the park and pa- 
 
 * Jace as pofTible. 
 
 ' I kifs lady Mellafm's and her fair daughter's 
 
 * hands, and am, 
 
 ' With very great rcfpcc^, 
 * Sir, 
 ' Your mod obliged, 
 * And moH: obedient fervant, 
 
 ' T. Thoughtless, 
 
 Mlfs Betfy was very glad to find a brother, who 
 had now been near five years abro;;d, was at Jaft 
 coming home, and much more fo, that he intended 
 to fet up houfekeepingin London, becaufe, as doubt- 
 ing not he would be pleafcd to have her with him, 
 fhe would have a fair pretence for quitting Mr. 
 Goodman's houfe, and the fociety of Mifs Flora, 
 who had now rendered hcrfvlf fo irkfomc to 
 her. 
 
 This did not hinder her, hovv'ever, from re- 
 proaching Mr. Gocdinan for having mentioned 
 to her brother any thing in relation to her lo\ crs, 
 .— " You fee, Sir," faid llie, " that one of 
 *' them has already abandoned mc, and you 
 " will alfo fee, in a ihort time, that the other 
 " will be little the better for his rival's refig- 
 *' nation." 
 
 L 2 Ta 
 

<#PG# 230>
220 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 To this Mr. Goodman pleiifantly replied, that 
 whatever fhc pretended at prefent, he behevcd bet- 
 ter things from her good fcnfe, and the merits of 
 Mr. Trueworth ; to which Mifs Betfy, unwilling 
 to ppolong the converfation, only told him, he 
 would find himfclf niiilaken, and ran haftily up 
 -flairs to examine the contents of thofe letters, 
 which, fhe had heard, lay on her toilet, ready for 
 her perufal. — The firft (he broke open was from 
 Mifb Forward, knowing k to be her's by the hand, 
 and eager to fee the event of a fate, which, by 
 the hiftory (iie had given her, had appeared fg 
 doubtful. 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 Dear M'lfs Betjy^ 
 ^ QlNCE I fav/ you I have been driven to the 
 ' O lail dcfpair : — the kind fupply you left with 
 
 * me was quite exhaiifred, and I mufl infallibly 
 ' have periihed, through want of the common ne- 
 
 * ceffaries of life, and the cruel ufagc of my mer- 
 ' cenary landlady, if my poor aunt in the country 
 ' had not fent me a fmall prefent, which for a 
 
 * fmali fpace of time afforded relief, but accom- 
 
 * panied with the melancholy account that my fa- 
 ' ther was inexorable to her pcrfwafions>-~would 
 
 * not hear of my return to L e, and vow- 
 
 * ed never to fee me more, or own me for his 
 ' child : — foon w^s I again reduced to the lowed 
 
 * ebb of mifery, — —had fcarce fulBcicnt tofurniili 
 < the provifions of another day, and was even 
 
 * threatened to be turned out of doors by the inhu- 
 ' man has:, who, I very well remember, you faid, 
 ' had her foul pi(5^ured in her countenance; — but, 
 ' my dear friend, in the midftof this diftrefs^, and 
 ' when I thought no human help was near, my af- 
 
 * fairs took a moft fudden and unexpc(5fed turn— - 
 
 ' Foitune 
 

<#PG# 231>
Afy/} Betsy Thoughtless. 221 
 
 * Fortune threw in my way a kinfman of my mo- 
 
 * ther's, whom I had never feen, nor even heard 
 
 * of beore j he compaflionated my calamitous 
 
 * condition, removed me from that difmal 
 
 ' place, — allows me a handfome maintenance, and 
 
 has proriiifcd to coiuinue it, till nature, and the 
 endeavours of my good aunt, fiiall work my fa- 
 ther to a more gentle temper. 
 
 * I long to fee you, and would have waited on 
 3'ou to return the money you were fo kind to lend 
 me, but knew not whether it were proper for 
 me to 60 fo, as I am wholly unacquainted with, 
 
 the family where you are. A vifit from you 
 
 would therefore now be doubly agreeable, as 
 I am lodged in a huufe lefs unworthy to re- 
 
 * ccive you, than that wretched one to v.iiich 
 I before took the liberty to make you an invi- 
 tation. 
 
 * You may now find me at Mr. Screencr*s, die 
 very next door to Linko's-Head, in Taviftcck- 
 
 * ftreet, in Covcnt-garden, where, I flatter m\feif, 
 your good-nature will foon bring you to her, who 
 
 * is impatient for that hapjjinefs, and will alwavs 
 
 * be, dear Mifs Betfy, 
 
 * Your very affectionate, 
 
 * And mult humble fervant, 
 
 ' A. Forward. 
 
 * P. S. I had forgot to tell you that I am every 
 
 * Friday engaged at my abovc-mentic.njd good* 
 
 * coufin's, and fhould never have foi given my felf, 
 ' if by this omiflionyoti had loil your labour, and 
 ' I the plcafure of your corppany/ 
 
 Mifs Betfy, who little doubted the fmcerity of 
 
 this cpiftle, was very much touched with it, and rc- 
 
 folvcd to comply with the invitation it contained, 
 
 in a (hort time.—— She now began to grow pretty 
 
 L 3 ileepy. 
 

<#PG# 232>
222 The II I S T O Pv Y of 
 
 ficepy, and would, probably, have deferred the 
 ncruial of the other two letters, 'till next morn- 
 ing, if Mifs Flora had not come up to go to bed : — 
 to Liv'oid, therefore, entering into any conveifatioii 
 v\ iiii her, file took up tlic firft that came to hand, 
 and i'ound the contents as follov/s : 
 
 To Mifs BiLTSY Thoughtless. 
 
 My denrjijhr, 
 S Mr, Goodman's endeavou-rs for procuring 
 me acommiilion have not yet been attend- 
 ed with the defired fuccefs, I have been prevailed 
 upon by the ftsllicitations of my friends, to give 
 them my promife of pafiing fome paitof the 
 
 ^ hur.ting feafon in L' c, To fhall not lee you 
 
 ' To foonasmy laii: might make you exped j---bu.t 
 
 * I will not diilcmble, i'o far as to rcll you, that to 
 
 * give you this information is the chief motive of my 
 
 * v/riting to you at prtfent j,-— no, my dear Bctfy ! 
 ' it is one of much more confequcnci that nov/ di- 
 
 * .leiSts my pcn^— -it is to give you fuch remonflran- 
 
 * ces, a?, I fear, y(.u Hand but in too much need 
 ^ of, to beware how you difregard the fmiles of 
 
 * fortune, and become th.e enemy of your own 
 ' happinefs.---! received a letter yellerday from 
 ' Mr. Trueworth ;---he complains fadly of my 
 
 * ii-a\ing in the country, and feems to think my 
 
 * prefence necelTary for the advancement of h?s 
 
 * courtPnip to you.-- I fliall be always glad to be 
 
 * obliged by you on any fcore, but extremely forry 
 
 * to find my intereds with you, as a brother, fhould 
 ' have more efFe6t on you than your own reafon, 
 
 * and the merits of one of the moft dcferving men 
 
 * on earth.- -I have no pretence to claim, any au- 
 
 * thority over you by the ties of blood, but may 
 
 * certainly flatter myfelf with having fome influ- 
 
 * cnce over you as a friend, ---enough at leaft I 
 
 ' hope 
 

<#PG# 233>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. -zi ^ 
 
 hope to prevail on you to confider ferioufly on 
 this matter, and am perfuaded, that if you once 
 bring yourfeif to do fo, Mr. TVuevvorth wiii wane 
 no other advocate to plead his caufe, than your 
 own linderftanding.---! am willing to believe the 
 aflurince you gave me in your Lift, of your heart 
 being free from any impreflion yet endeavoured 
 to be made upon it; did I think otherwifc I 
 fhould be entirely filent on this occafion.-—! 
 would be far, my dear fifter, from oppofing your 
 inclinations, I v/ould only wilh to direct thcni 
 where there is a profpecl of the molt felicity :— - 
 let me conjure you, therefore, to open your un- 
 prejudiced eyes, nor be wilfully blind to the gooti 
 intended for you by your better ftars.---As you 
 can never expc<?t prr.pofals of more advantzge, 
 
 * than thofe the loveof Mr.Trueworth has inclinc(i 
 
 * him to make you,-- -I may be pretty confident, 
 ' that you have not a friend in the world,, vvlu* 
 
 * would not highly condemn your v/ant of giving 
 
 * due attention to it.— Forgive the warmth witli 
 
 * which I exprefs myfelf, as it fprings from th« 
 
 * fincereit zeal for the ei{abli(l:iment cf your inte- 
 
 * reft and happincfs, than which nothing is more 
 
 * at the heart of him, who is, 
 
 * With the moft tender regard, 
 
 ' Dear fifter, 
 
 * Your very affedionate friend, 
 
 ' And brotiicr, 
 • F. Thoughtless.' 
 
 While Mifs Betfy was reading thefe letters ^^:fs 
 Flora, who immediately followed her into the 
 chamber, would fain haVe interrupted her by one 
 impertinent queftion or other ; but receiving; no 
 anfwer to any thing fhe fatd, gave over fpeaking, 
 and went directly to bed, and Mifs Betfy breaking 
 L 4 open 
 

<#PG# 234>
2 24 "^he HISTORY of 
 
 open the third and laH: letter (he had to perufe, 
 
 found it contained as follows : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy THouGfiTLESs. 
 
 * My deer Mifs Betfy, S 
 
 * I HAD wrote to you before, if- I had not 
 ' k, been prevented by an inflammation in my 
 ' eyes, which, for fonie time paft, has rendered 
 ' my pen of no ufe to me, and I did not chufe to 
 
 * employ an emanuenfis in what I have to fay to 
 
 * you, but now take the firit opportunity, being 
 ' fomewhat better, of giving you that advice, 
 
 * which, it may be reafonabiy fuppoftd, a perfon 
 
 * of your yeursand inexperience of the world may 
 
 * Hand in need of, or, if not (o^ will be of fome 
 ' fervice in corroborating the good feiuiments you 
 
 * are already infpired with. 
 
 * *" It was with an extream Concern I heard what 
 
 * happened on your account at Oxford, and hope 
 ' you have fo well reflected on the danger you 
 
 * were in, the confequences that attended it, and 
 ' how much wojfe might probably have enfued, 
 •■ as to be ever fince more circumfpetSt and careful 
 
 ' with v/hat company you truft yourfelf. 1 am 
 
 ' far from reproaching you v/ith the effefts of an 
 
 * accident altogether unforefeen, and impofTible to 
 *■ be even gueffed at by you, but would beg you to 
 
 * keep always in your mind, that what has been, 
 
 * may fome time or other be again, and that repeat- 
 ' ed ii^advertcncies may make heaven weary of 
 
 *' continuing its protecStion : but, my dear Mifs 
 
 ' Betfy, it is not in my apprchenfions of your own 
 
 * condu6f, that the greatfll part of my fear for 
 
 ' you confifts; the world, alas ! and more par- 
 
 *• ticularly the place you live in, afford? but too 
 *• many wretches, of both fexes, who make it 
 ' their bufinefs to entrap unwary innocence, and 
 
 « the 
 

<#PG# 235>
MJfs Betsy Thoughtless. 225 
 
 * the moft fair pretences are often the cover to the 
 
 < moft foul clefigns ; there are fo many daily 
 
 * inftances of the ilridkft caution not being always 
 
 * a fufficient fecurity againft the fnarcs laid for our 
 
 * deftrudion, that I look on it as half a miracle, 
 
 < when a young woman, handfome, and expofed 
 « as you are, efcapes unprejudiced, either in her 
 
 virtue or reputation. — Coi-sfider, my dear child, 
 you have no tender morher, whofe precepts and 
 example might keep you fteady in the paths of 
 
 * prudence; no father, whofe authority might 
 
 awe the daring libertine from any injurious attack ; 
 a'^d are but too much miibefs of yourfcif. In 
 
 * fine, thus environed with temptations, I fee no 
 
 * real defence for you but in a good Jiufband. 
 
 * I have ever condemned rufliing too early into 
 
 * marriage, and of rifquing for the fake of one 
 
 * convenience, the v/ant, perhaps, of a thoufanJ 
 
 * Others ; but when an offer happens to be made, 
 
 * equally honourable and advantageous, and which 
 
 * affords an almoft afiurcd profpect of every 
 
 * thing neceffary to compleat the happinefs of that 
 ' ftate, it cannot be too foon in life accepted. — 
 
 * I hear with pleafure, that an offer, fuch as I ha\'e 
 
 * been defcribing, is now prefented to you, and it 
 
 * would give me an adequate concern to hear that 
 
 * you had rejecfted it. — I need not tell you I mean 
 
 * Mr- Trueworth ; for though there may be nia- 
 
 * ny others who make their addreffcs to you on the 
 ' fame fcore, yet I am entirely ignorant of every 
 ' thing relaing to them ; but I am v/ell affurcd, 
 
 not only by your brother's toflimony, but by fe- 
 veral gentlemen of this counry, that in the for- 
 tune, p-,rfv>n, and amiable qualities of that gen- 
 tleman are comprifed all that you either can, or 
 
 * oug'.i to wiili in a hufband : trifle not then 
 
 * wiih a heart (o dwfcrving of you ; — fcruple not 
 
 * to become a wife, when merit, fuch as his, m- 
 
 L 5 ' vitess 
 

<#PG# 236>
226 rhe HISTORY^/ 
 
 * vites, and fo many reafons concur to urge you to 
 
 * confcnt. Believe me, there is more true fe- 
 
 * liclty in the fiiKcrc and tender friendfliip of one 
 
 * man ot" honour, than all the flattering profeflions 
 
 * of a thoufand coxcombs. I have much more to 
 
 * fay to you on this Iiead, but fhall defer it, 'till 
 
 * you let me know with what kind of fentiments 
 ■* it is that you regard the gentleman I have been 
 
 * fpeaking of, which I beg you will do without 
 
 * dilguife : be fatisfied that the fccrct of your 
 
 * real inclinations will be as fafe in my keeping as 
 •* your own, and that I am, 
 
 ' With the moft perfect: amity, 
 ' My dear Mifs Betfy, 
 * Your conftant friend, 
 ^ And humble fervant, 
 
 M. Trusty.' 
 
 The time of night did not permit Mifs Betfy to 
 give thefc letters all the attention which the writers 
 of them, doubtlefs, defired (lie fliould do ; but (lie 
 locked them carefully in her cabinet, rcfolving to 
 confidcr the purport of them more fcrioufly before 
 (he letuMied any ar.fvv'cr. 
 
 C H A P. XXVIII. 
 
 Serves as a fiippkment to the former. 
 
 TH E next morning 'Mifs Flora opened her 
 lipsahnolt as foon as (lie did her eyes, to talk 
 to Mifi; Betfy on the dcfign had been agreed upon 
 bttween them the day before, in relation to Mr. 
 Staple. — She told her, fhe had employed her whole 
 thoughts about it ever fince, and that fhe had found 
 out a v/ay of introducing the difcourfe, (o as to give 
 bim v\Q lUfpicioir that (lie cams from her, yet-, at 
 
 tiis 
 

<#PG# 237>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 227 
 the fame time, take away all his apprchenfions of 
 her being in love with Mr. 'rnieworth ; and ad- 
 ded, that (he would go to his lodgings immediately 
 after breakfaft. 
 
 " Indeed," replied Mifs Bctfy, fullenly, " you 
 
 " fliall do no fuch thing ; 1 Ao not care wjiat 
 
 *' his apprehcnfions arc, or any one's elfe ;--tiic men 
 *' may all think and i\o as they will, — I Ihali not 
 
 *' fill my mind with any ftufF about them." ' 
 
 *« Heyday," cried Mifs Flora, a good deal (hock- 
 ed at this fudden turn, '* what whim has got pof- 
 " feffion of you now ?" The whim you endci- 
 " voured to pofTcfs me with," faid Mife Bctfv, 
 fcornfully, " would have been a very ridiculous 
 •' one I am fure ; — but I have confidered better 
 *' on it, and defpife fuch foolidi fancies." — Good- 
 •^ lack,'; returned the ether, '^ you are grown 
 
 •' wonderous wife methinks, at leaft imagine 
 
 ^' yourfelf (o ; but I fliall go to Mr. Stnple for 
 
 *' all this, 1 cannot hear that he fliould think 
 
 ** you are in love wiih Truewoith." — I know no 
 " bufinefs," faid Alifs Bctfy, in a haughty tone,. 
 *' you have either with my love or hate, and I dc- 
 *' fire for the future, you v.ill forbear troubling 
 ** your head in my affairs." 
 
 Mifs Flora then told her, that what fhe had of- 
 fered was meerly in regard to her reputation, and 
 then ran over again all the arguments (he had urged,. 
 in order to prevail on her to come into the mea- 
 fures fhe propofed ; but whatever fhe faid, cither 
 in the wheedling or remonilratii-g accent, was c- 
 qually ineffectual, the ether remained firm in her 
 refolutlon, and behaved in a manner fo different 
 from what Mifs Flora had ever {q^w her do before, 
 that flie knew not what to think of it. — Having 
 her own reafons, however, to bring her, if pofTible, 
 to a lefs grave way of thinking, flie omitteil no- 
 thing in the power of artifice, that (he imagined 
 
 might 
 

<#PG# 238>
22S The HIST OR Y of 
 
 might be conducive to that end. —All the time they 
 were rifmg, — all the time they were dreffing, did fhe 
 continue to labour on this fcore, without being able 
 to obtain any other anfwers to what flie faid, than 
 fuch as were peremptorily in the negative. 
 
 It is, certain, that Mifs Betfy was of fo foft and 
 tra6lable a difpofition, that half the arguments Mifs 
 Flora had alledged, would, at another time, have 
 won her to confent to things of much greater con- 
 fequence than this appeared -to be j but the difco- 
 very (he had the day before made of her deceit, 
 and the little good -will fhe had towards her, gave 
 her fufHcient reafon to apprehend, that fhe had 
 ibme further defigns than flie pretended in this pro- 
 ject, though of what nature it could be was not in 
 
 her power to conceive. The thing in difpute 
 
 ieemed to her extremely trifling in itfelf, but the 
 eagernefs with which Ihe was prelTed to it, by a 
 perfon c-f whofe treachery fhe had fo flagrant a 
 proof, convinced her, that fhe ought not on any 
 account to acquiefce. 
 
 Mifs Flora, on the other hand, was difconcerted 
 beyond meafure at this unexpected change in Mifs 
 Betfy 's humour, of which fhe was as little able to 
 divine the caufe, as the other was to guefs the dc- 
 lign fhe had formed ; but determining to accom- 
 plifh her point, if poifible, at any rate, flie endea- 
 voured aii fhe could to dilTcmble her chagrin, and 
 ftill afFcclcd a mighty regard for the honour of 
 Mifs Betfy, telling her, Ihe was refol'ved to fcrve 
 her whether fhe would or not, and that how much 
 focver (he difapproved it, fhe fhould purfue her firft 
 intention, and undeceive Mr. Staple in the opinion 
 he had, of her being fo Ijily as to fall in love with 
 Mr. Truewortli. 
 
 Mifs Betfy on hearing this, and not doubting 
 but fhe would do as flie had faid, turned tovvaids 
 her, and looking full upon her with a countenance 
 
 compofed 
 

<#PG# 239>
M'lfs Betsy Thoughtless. 229 
 compofed enough, but which had yet in it fcme- 
 what between the ironical and kwercy replied in 
 thefe terms,---*' Since you arc fo much bent," 
 faid fhe, " on making a vifit to Mr. Staple, far 
 *' be it from me, Mifs Flora, to deprive that gen- 
 •' tleman of the favour you intend him, provided 
 *' you gi^ve me your promife, in the prefcnce of 
 '' Mr. Goodman, and he will be your fecurity 
 *' for the perfcirmance of it, that you will mention 
 *' neither my name, nor that of Mr. Trueworth, 
 " and above all, that you v/ill not pretend to have 
 *' any knowledge of affairs you never have been 
 ** trufted wirii." 
 
 However inconfiderate, or incautious, Mifs Bctfy 
 may appear to the reader, as to her condud in ge- 
 neral, it muft be acknowledged, that at this time 
 fhe ilicwed an uncommon prefence of mind.«—— 
 1 his was, indeed, the only way to put a Oop, and 
 quafh at once that fcheme, which her falfe friend 
 had formed to do her a real prejudice, under the 
 pretence of fcrving her. 
 
 It is not in words to exprcfs the confufion Mifs 
 Flora was in, on hearing Mifs Belfy fpeak in this 
 manner. Bold as ihe was by nature, ai^d habi- 
 tuated to repartee, (lie had not now the power of 
 uttering one v/ord : innocence iifelf, when over- 
 awed by authority, could not have flood more 
 daunted and abafiicd, while the other, with a care- 
 lefs ?Ar^ added, " As foon as we go down fiairs 
 " I fnall. fpeak to Mr. Goodman about this 
 . " matter." 
 
 Whether Mifs Betfy really intended to put this 
 menace in execution, or not, is uncertain ; fcr 
 Mifs Flora recovering her fpirits, and her cunnino- 
 at the fame time, affected to burft into a vi(;len° 
 iit of laugh ler. " Mr. Goodman I" faid fhe ; 
 
 " mighty' pretty, indeed I -you would trcuble 
 
 " Mr. Goodman with the h'ttle impertlntnces we 
 
 ^' talk 
 

<#PG# 240>
230 1b^ HISTORY of 
 
 *' talk on between ourfclves ! but cfo fo if you 
 
 *' tliink proper. 1 fliall tell him the truth, that 
 
 ** I made this propofal to you only to try you, and 
 *' but aded the fccond part of what Mr. Chatfree 
 *' had begun. — You did not imagine fure, " con- 
 tinued file with a malicious fnecr, " that I loved 
 " you fo well, that for your fike I would hazard 
 •* my perfon and reputation, by going to fee a 
 " young gay fellow at his own lodgirigs/' 
 , " As for that,"' cried Mils Bctfy, with a look 
 ^as contemptuous as flie could polTibly aiTumc, *' I 
 *' am equally well acquainted with the modefty 
 *' and fincerity of Mifs Flora, and know how to 
 " fet a juft value upon both." — In fpeaking thefe 
 words, having nov/ got on her cloaths, flie flung 
 out of the room without flaying to hear what an- 
 fwer the other would have made. 
 
 After this thefe tv/o high fpirits had little inter- 
 courfe, never fpeaking to each other, but on fucii 
 common affairs as were unavoidable between per- 
 fons who lived in the fame houfe, eat at the fimie 
 table, and lay in the fame bed. — Plow Mifs Flora 
 employed her thoughts will very fhortly be feen, 
 but we muft firft examine what eff^w6l thefe late oc- 
 currences had on the mind of Mifs Betfy. 
 
 Youna; as (lie was, (he m'vAw. be fafd to have 
 fjcn a great deal of the world ; and as (he had a fine 
 underitanding, and a very juft notion of things, 
 wanted only to rcfle6l on the many follies and de- 
 ceits which fom.e of tliufc who call themfelves the 
 beau monde are guiby of, to be enabled to difpife 
 
 them. The laft letter flie had received from 
 
 lady Trufly made a flrong imprcflion on her^ and 
 carting a retrofpe(fl: on fcverai paft tranfadlions (lie 
 had been witnefs of, as well as thofe fhe had been 
 concerned in herfclf, began to v/onder at, and 
 condemn the vanity of being pleafcd with fuch {ha.- 
 dowiog nothings : ■■■■ fuch fleeting, unfubftantial 
 
 delights,, 
 

<#PG# 241>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 23? 
 
 delights, accompanied with noifc and hurry in the 
 pofleflion, and attended with wearinefs and vexati- 
 on of fpirit. A multiplicity of admirers feemed 
 
 now to her among this number ; her foul con- 
 
 fefled, that to encourage the addreflcs of a f©p, was 
 both dangerous and filly ; and to flatter with vain 
 hopes the lincerc paflion of a man of honour, was 
 equally ungenerous and cruel. 
 
 Thefe confiderations were very favourable to Mr. 
 
 Trueworth ; (he ran through every particular 
 
 cf that gentleman's charadcr and behaviour, and 
 could find nothing which could make her liaRd 
 excufcd even to herfclf, for continuing to treat him 
 with the little ferioufnefs fhe had hitherto done. 
 " What then fliall I do with him ?'* faiJ flie to 
 
 herfelf. " Mull I at once difcard him, dcfuc 
 
 *' him to defiil his vifits, and tell him I am deter- 
 '• mined never to be his !— or muft I rcfolve to 
 '* think of marrying him, and h nceforward enter- 
 " tain him, as the man who is really ordained to be 
 
 *' one day my hufband ! 1 have at prcfcnt 
 
 *' rather an averfion, than an inclinrition to a wcd- 
 " dcd fiate ; yet if my mind fliould alter in this 
 '* point, where fhall I find a partner fo qualified to 
 
 " make me happy in it ? but yet," continued 
 
 (lie, *' to become a matron at my years, is what I 
 
 '* cannot brook the thought* of ; if he loves me 
 
 *' he muft wa-it, it will be fufficient to receive 
 
 " the addreflcs of no other ; but then how ihall I 
 " refufe thofe who may make an offer of them, 
 *' without givin:^ the world room to belie. el am 
 " pre-engaged." 
 
 Thus did (lie argue with herfelf,— the dilem- 
 ma appeared hard to her, but what was the refuit 
 of her reafonincis will befl appear in the anfwer flie 
 fijut to lady Trufly's letter, which was in the fol-_ 
 bwing terms :, 
 
 To 
 

<#PG# 242>
232 ne HISTORY of 
 
 To Lady Trusty. 
 
 • Ma dam y 
 *■ T Received the honour of yours, and fincerely 
 ' X thank you for the good wiflies and advice con- 
 
 * tained in it : be afllired, madam, 1 have a juft 
 « fenfe of the value I ought to fet upon them, and 
 
 * fhall henceforth do the utmoft in my power to 
 
 * deferve it. — I have, indeed, no parent to dire6^, 
 
 * and but few faithful friends to guide me through 
 ' the perplexing labyrinth of life. 1 confefs, I 
 
 * have been too often milled by the prevalence of 
 
 * example, and my own idle caprice, — it is there- 
 
 * fore the higheO: charity to fhew me to myfelF. 
 
 * — I now fee, and am afhamed of the many inad- 
 
 * verteneies I have been guilty of. The dangers 
 
 * which a young woman, like me, mufl necellarily 
 
 < be continually expofed to, appear to mc, from 
 
 < what you fay of them, in their proper colours, 
 
 * and convi[]ce me, that noperfon of underflanding 
 
 * would condemn me, if to avoid f ) many threaten- 
 ^'-,ed ills, I flew to that afylum your iadyfliip has 
 
 ' mentioned. 1 will own to you yet farther, 
 
 ' madam, that I am not infenfible of the merits of 
 
 * Mr. Trueworth, nor of the advantages, which 
 ' would attend my acceptance of his propolals ; but 
 
 * I know not how it is, I cannot all at once bring 
 
 * myfelf into a liking of the marriage ftate. Be 
 
 * allured of this, tliat I never yet have fcen any 
 ' m.an, whom my heart has been more inclined to 
 
 favour, and that, at prefent, I neither receive, 
 
 nor defire the addrefTes of any other. There 
 
 is no anfwcring for events, bur, in the way of 
 thinking I now am, it feems not improbable, that 
 I Ihall one day comply with what my friends t^ke 
 
 fo much pains in perfwading me to. \n the 
 
 mean time, 1 befeechyou to believe I i}iairre2;u- 
 
 ' late 
 

<#PG# 243>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 2;^3 
 
 late my condudl, fo as to eafe you cf all thofe 
 * apprehenfions you are fo gocd to entertain on my 
 
 ?iccount. 1 am, 
 
 ' VViih a profound rerpt(fl, 
 ' Madam, 
 * Your ladyfhip's mofl: obliged, 
 * And moft devoted fciv.^nt, 
 
 E. Thoughtless.' 
 
 Mlfs Betfy alfo anfvvered her brother's letter at 
 
 the fame time ; but the purport of it being much 
 
 the fame with that (he wrote to [nfly Trudy, there 
 
 is no occafion for inferting it. 
 
 CHAP. XXIX. 
 
 Seems to bring things pretty near a concfufion. 
 
 MISS Betfy was now in as happy a difpohtion 
 as any of her friends, or even Mr. l>ue- 
 
 worth himfelf could defire ; fhe lifiened to the 
 
 confirmations he was every day giving her of his 
 paflion, with the greateft affability, and much more 
 (erioufnefs and attention, than fhe had been accu- 
 itomed.- The quarrel (he had with Mifs Plora 
 making her willing to avoid her as much as pofiible, 
 he was frequently alone with her whole hours toge- 
 ther, and had all the opportunities he could wifh of 
 cultivatiiig the eflcem, (he made no fcruple of con- 
 
 fefiing Ihe had for him. As Mr. Stap'e was 
 
 now gone out of town, purfuant to the refolution 
 he had taken, and no other rival, at leaft none en- 
 couraged by Mifs Betfy, had as yet fcconded him, 
 he had all the reafon in the world to flatter himftlf, 
 that the accomplifhment of his wifhes were not far 
 diftant. 
 
 Plays. ——operas. and mafquerades, were 
 
 now beginning to come in vogue, and he had the 
 fatisfadion to fee his miftrefs refufe whatever tirkets 
 
 were 
 

<#PG# 244>
2 5 J. 7/^^ HI S TO R Y ^/ 
 
 were offered her for thole diverfions, by any of tliff 
 gentlcau-n who vifited lady Mcllafin, and at the fame 
 time readily agreed to accompany him to thefc,, or 
 any other public entertainments, whenever he re- 
 queued that favour of her. 
 
 Mifb Betfy's behaviour in this point, however 
 had more the air, than tliC reality of kindnefs to 
 Mr. Trueworth ; for in efrefl it was nut becaufe 
 Hie would not accept of tickets from any other per- 
 fon than himfclF, but becaufe they were offered by 
 gentlemen of lady Mellafin'sacquauitaiiCe, and con- 
 fequentiy, in refpeci: to her, Mifs Flora had the 
 fame iliare in the invitation, with whom Cne was 
 determined never more to be feen abroad. 
 
 This requiied fume fort of contrivance, to be 
 managed in fuch a manner as to give no umbrage 
 to Mr. Goodman, or lady Mellafin, fur the former 
 of whom ilie had always a very great cfteem, and 
 did notchufe, to alTard the latter any caufe of com- 
 plaint againd her, while fhe continued to live in the 
 
 fame houfe. ^^The method (he took therefore to 
 
 avoid a tiling fodifygreeable to her, and at the fame 
 time to give no occafion of ofu^nce, was always to 
 iniike choice of on$ diverfion, when flie knew Mifs 
 Flora was pre-en-gsged to another. 
 
 To partake of thefe pleafiires, which Mr. True- 
 worth, feeing into her temper, was almod every 
 cfay prefenting, flie invited fometimcs one lady, 
 fometimes another of thofe {he converfed with ; but 
 the per fon who moil: frcquei"''dy accompanied her, 
 was Mifs Mabel, a young lady, who lived in the 
 iiextdreet, and whom fhe had been acquainted with 
 ever fmce her coming to Londoiv, but had not been 
 altogether (o agreeable to her, as (he really deferved, 
 and otherwife would have been, if lady Mellafin- 
 and Mifs Flora had not reprefented her as a prying, 
 cenforious ill-natured creature, and, in fine, given 
 her all the epithets which compofe the chara£ler of 
 a prude. Slie 
 

<#PG# 245>
Mifs Betsy Thought lej^s. 235 
 She was, indeed, both in principles and behavi- 
 our the very reverfe of Mifs Flora ; fhe was 
 
 modcft without afFedation, rcferved without 
 
 auderity,— -chearful without levity,— compaf- 
 
 fionate and benevolent in her nature,- and, to 
 
 crown all, was perfe^f^ly fmcere : Mifs Betfy 
 
 had never wanted penetration enough to fee, and 
 to admire the amiible q jalities of this young lad)-, 
 nor had been at all influenced by the cnara<Ster gi\cn 
 of her by lady Mellafin and Mifs Flora, but being 
 herfc'f of too gay and volatile a temper, tl;e more 
 ferious deportment of the other gave fomcwhat of a 
 check to her's, and for that reafon rendered her 
 
 focicty lefs coveted by her. The letter of lady 
 
 Truliy, however, joined to the late accidcr.ts which 
 had happened, having nov.' given her a turn of mii d 
 vaftly different from what it had been a very litilo 
 time before, made her now prefer the converfcitic^n 
 of Mifs Mabel, to mufl others of her acquaintance. 
 This young lady having been often in Mr. True- 
 wdrtK's company, v/rth Mifs Betfy, faw enough 
 into him to be afliired tlie pafnon he profefTcd for her 
 .was perfcdly jic-ncjurable and finctre ; and as (he 
 had a real aft'cflion for her fair friend, and thought 
 it a match greatly to Iier advantage, was perpetu- 
 ally remonftrating to her, that (he could not tre^t 
 with too much complaifance, a lover fo every way 
 deferving of her. 
 
 It is certain, that what (he fald on this fcorc, had 
 fome weight with Mifs Betfy 5 Mr. Goodman alfo 
 was every day admonifhing her in behalf of Mf. 
 Trueworth, as he thought it his duty to do, both 
 
 as her guardian and her friend. In fine, never 
 
 was a heart more bcfet, more forced, as it were, 
 
 into tender fentiments than that of this young lady .* 
 
 fird by the merits and afTiduities of the pafiio- 
 
 nate invader, and next by the perfwiifions of all 
 
 thofe, who jQae had any reafon to believe had h»r 
 
 intcrcft 
 

<#PG# 246>
126 Th U\ ST ORY of 
 
 intereft in view, and wifhed to fee her happinefs 
 eflab.ifhed. 
 
 I.ncmy as flie was by nature to fer Icuis refle<5lion, 
 on any account, much more on that of marriiige, 
 every thing now contributed to compel her to it j 
 fnc could not avoid feeing and confc/ling within 
 heiTL-if, that if ever flie became a v/ife, the title 
 could notbeatten'Jed with m. re tejicii)^ than when 
 conferred on her by a perlon ul Mr. Trueworth's • 
 fortune, chara(5^cr, and difpcifition. 
 
 She was one day alone, and in a very confidera- 
 tivemood, when a letter was brought to her, which 
 fhe Vv'as told came by the penny poft ; as fhe v/as 
 not accudumed to receive any by that carriage, it 
 pretty much furprifed lier, but much more {oy 
 v.hen having hafliiy opened it, (he found the con- 
 tents as follov/ : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 ' TT is with an inexprelHble concern, that I relate 
 ' A to you a thing, which I am but too fenfible 
 will give you fome difquiet, nor could have pre- 
 vailed with myfelf on any terms to have done it, 
 were it not to preferve you from falling into much 
 greater afHi<S^ions than the difcovery I am about to 
 
 make, can poffibly inflicSt : but not to keep 
 
 you in Jufpence, you are courted by a gen- 
 
 * tleman whofe name is 1 rueworth ; he is re- 
 
 ' commended by your brother, who, alas ! knows 
 
 * him much lefs than he imagines : he has in- 
 
 * deed a large eftate, and does not want accom- 
 
 * plifhments to endear him to the fair fex, 1 
 
 ' wifli he had as much intrinfic honour and fmce- 
 ' rity to deferve, as he has perfonal endowments 
 
 * to acquire, the favours fo lavifhly beftowed upon 
 
 * him, — —I hope, however, you have not been fo 
 
 * much deceived by the innocence of your own 
 
 * heart. 
 

<#PG# 247>
Mifs B E T<Y Though t l ess. 2^7 
 
 * heart, and the fancied wuegrity of his, as to be fo 
 dillra^tcdJy in iuvt vviihliini, as he has the \anity 
 to boalr, and your cumpai-.ion and luppofud fiicrid,' 
 
 * Mifs Mabel, reports yCu, are : if his ucfjgns 
 
 uj-.vjn you are luch as they ougnt to i>e, he is at 
 leail afhamed to conftls they are i\> j aud the lady 
 1 jull mentioned, whiip^rs it in all compc.nies, 
 that a inaruige with y u is of ali tliin^s in the 
 
 * world the iarthelt from his thougiiti" He 
 
 pbinly fays, that he tut tiiflcs with you, 'till 
 your brothers come to town, and will then find 
 fome pre:tnce to break entirelv with you,— - 
 
 * perhaps, on the fcore of fortune ; but of th^.t I 
 am not poflti>'e,«— — I only rept^at Tome part of 
 thofeunhaiidiomecxprclTionshii unw-orihy tongue 
 h^ uttered. 
 
 ' But, madam, as I have given you this intelli- 
 gence, {o I think it my duty to offer you feme 
 
 * advice for your behaviour, in fo nice and critical 
 
 * a juncture. As he threatens to abandon vou 
 
 on the arrival of your brothers, I fnouid think, 
 that if you forbid him your p:efence, 'till that 
 time, it would not only be a fure t.uchflone of 
 
 ' his affection, but aifo be a means of clearing y< ur 
 reputation from thofe bltmifnes it has received on 
 
 his account. -After Vrhat I have faid, I believe 
 
 it would be needlefs to add, that the lefs freely 
 ' you converfe with Mifs Mabel, the lefs vou will 
 ' fufFer, both in the judgment of the world, and 
 
 * your own future peace of mind. 
 
 ' Slight not this counfel, becaufe given behind 
 
 * the curtain, but be afTured it comes from one, 
 
 * who is, 
 
 ' With the finccreft attachment, 
 ' Mai:>am, 
 * Your moit humble 
 
 ' Though concealed fervjint.' 
 
 If 
 

<#PG# 248>
230 The H I S TO R Y cf 
 
 If Mifs Bctfy had received this letter a very fmall 
 time before (he did, it might probably have wrought 
 on her all the efFcd it was intended for ; but fhe 
 had fcarce read it half through, before the lucky 
 difcovery of Mifs P'lora's bafenefs, fo feafonably 
 made to her by Mr. Saving, came frefh into her 
 mind, -and fl^e was at no lofs to guefs at the mali- 
 cious purpofe, and the author of it, though wrote 
 in a hand altogelher a ftranger to her. 
 
 She doubted not but it was a^trick of Mifs Flo- 
 ra's, to caufe a ftparation between her and Mr, 
 Trueworth ; but the motives, v/hich had inftigatcd 
 her to do this, were not in her power to conceive. 
 ' *' Revenge for her difappointed expectations," 
 /aid ilie to htrk]^^ '* might make her take the 
 " fteps (he did, on Mr. Saving's account ; but 
 
 *' udiat has Mr. Trueworth done to her ? He 
 
 never pretended love to her,— he neither flat- 
 tered, or deceived her vanity,— -it mufl be there- 
 fore only a wicked propenfity,-— an envious,-— 
 unfcxrial difporiticn,---a love of mifchief implant- 
 ed in her nature, and uncorredted by reafon or 
 principle, that has induced her to be guilty of 
 this poor,-— low, enervate fpight j but 1 am re- 
 folved to mortify it." 
 She was not long confidering in what manner fhe 
 fhould proceed, to do as fhe had faid, and, I be- 
 Jicve the reader will acknov/ledge, flie hit upon 
 one, as effedlual for that end as could have been 
 contrived. 
 
 She appeared extremely gay the whole time of 
 xlinner, and as foon as it was over, " I will pre- 
 *' fent )^ou with a defcrt, Sir," faid fhe to Mr. 
 Goodman : " I'll (hew you what pains has been ta- 
 *' ken to break off my acquaintance with Mr. True- 
 *' worth, by fome wretch, who either envies me the 
 " honour of his alicciions, or him the place they i- 
 *' marine he has in miiKi but, I befcech you, read 
 
 " it," 
 

<#PG# 249>
M'ifs Betsy Thoughtless. 239 
 
 '^ it," continued (lie, " and I will appeal to ycu> 
 «' lady Mellafin, at^d Mifs Flora, if ever there 
 " was a more ftupid plot." 
 
 " Stupid enough, indeed," cried the honed 
 merchant, as Toon as he had done reading, " but 
 
 " it is yet more bafe. 1 am glad, however," 
 
 continued he, " to find your good feiife prevents 
 " you from being impofed upon by fuch artifices." 
 — — " This is {o iLallow a one," anfw^ered flie, 
 *' that a very fmail ihare of underftanding might 
 *' ferve to defend any one from being deceived by 
 
 " it. 1 pity the weaknefs, while 1 dtfpifc the 
 
 *' bafencfs of fuch mean incendiaries ; Mr. 
 
 *' Trurworth, however, will fare the better for 
 *' this attempt againfl: him ; I will now make no 
 *' fcruple of preferring him to all mankind btfides, 
 *' -—and perhaps, when my brothers arrive, fliall 
 *' confent to every thing he defires." 
 
 Lady iMcliafin could not help applauding the fpi- 
 rit and refolution flie fliewed on tliis occafion, and 
 Mr. Goodman was quite charmed with it ; and 
 both of them joined in the feverert: exclamations a- 
 gainft the folly and wickedncfa of the kttcr-writer ; 
 but Mifs Flora faid Httle, and as foon as £he coi Id 
 quit the table with decency, Vv'ent up into her 
 chamber, faying, (he had a piece of work in hand, 
 which {he was in hafte to finifli. 
 
 If Mifs Betfv had wanted any confirmation of 
 the truth of her fufpicions, the looks of Mifs Flora, 
 during this v/hole difcourfe, would have removed all 
 doubt in her, and the opportunity of venting the 
 rplccn Ihe had To juflly conceived againft her, w ith- 
 out fteming to do fo, gave her a moft exquifite fa- 
 tisfaclion. 
 
 CHAP. 
 

<#PG# 250>
240 The HISTORY of 
 
 CHAP. XXX. 
 
 Is the better for being Jhort, 
 
 r^ IS S Flora retired to her chamber, ind«eJ, 
 V JL not to employ herfelf in the manner (he pre- 
 tei).led, but to give a loofe to paflions more inor- 
 diriate and outrageous, than it would naturally be 
 believed could have taken pofTefiion of fo young a 
 heart. 
 
 But it is now high time to let the reader fee into 
 the fecret fprii^gs, which let her wicked v/it in mo- 
 tion, and induced her to ad in the mannei (lie had 
 done. 
 
 Through the whole courfe of the preceding 
 pages, many hints have been given, that the incli- 
 nations of this young lady were far from being un* 
 blameable, and it will not feem Ih'ange, that a per- 
 fon cf the difpofition llie^has all along teftitied, 
 fhould envy and malign ihofe charms (he every day 
 fav/ fo much extolled, and preferred above her 
 own ; but we do not oidinaiiiy find one, who all 
 gay and free, like her, and* who various times, and 
 for various obj.;i61s, had eypcrienceJ thcfe emotions 
 which we call love, ihould, all at once, be infpired 
 with a pafTioi) po lefs ftrious, than it was violent, 
 for a perfon, who never made the ieail: addrefles to 
 her on that account. 
 
 Yei {o in effect it was : Mr. Trueworth had 
 
 been but a very few times in her company, before 
 fhe began to entertain defires for h'^r fair friend.— 
 Whenever fhe had an opportunity of fpecking to 
 him alone, fhe made him many advances, which 
 he either did not, or would not iiiterpiet in the fenib 
 
 file meantuhem.-^ This coldnefs, inf^ead of a- 
 
 bating, but the more inflamed her vvifhcs, and look? 
 ing on the pafiion he haJ for Mifs Betfy, as the 
 onl) impediment to the gratification of her inclina- 
 tions. 
 

<#PG# 251>
Mi/} Betsy Thoughtl'SS'^. 241 
 
 tions, {he curft his conftancy, and the beauties 
 
 which excited it. So true is that obfervation of 
 
 Mr. Dryden, 
 
 ' Love ! various minds docs varioufly infpire ; 
 
 * He ftirs in gentle natures gentle fires, 
 
 * Like that of incenfe on the altar laid j 
 
 ' But raging flames tempeftuous fouls invade. 
 
 * A fire which ev'ry windy pafllon blows, 
 
 ♦- With pride it mounts, and with revenge it 
 ' glows.' 
 
 Mifs Flora was not of a temper, either to bear 
 the pangs of hopelefs love, in filent grief, or to 
 
 give way too readily to dtfp. ir. In fpite of the 
 
 indifference (he found her v If treated with by Mr. 
 Trueworth, (he was not without hope, that if {he 
 could by any means occasion a difunion between him 
 and Mifs Betfy, he would then be brought to calt 
 his eyes on her, and return her ilame with feme de- 
 gree of ardency. 
 
 It was for this end {he had taken fo much pains 
 in endeavouring to perfwade Mifs Bctfy, either to 
 write, or fufFer her to go to Mr. Staple, in ordtr, 
 as fh.e pretended, to undeceive that gentleman in 
 his opinion, that {he was in love with Mr. True- 
 worth j but her intentions, in reality, were to 
 make him believe, that he himfelf was the favoured 
 perfon, and had much the advantage over his rival 
 in the afFe^iions of his miflrefs .— Th's {he doubted 
 not would make him quit his refolution cf g' inj 
 into the country, and encourage him to rencv/ his 
 
 courtfhip with the fame fervency as ever. 
 
 The pride {he knew Mifs Betfy took in a muliipU- 
 city of lovers, and the equality with which ilie had 
 carried herfelf between him and Mr. Trueworth, 
 and which probably {he wou'd continue, feemed to 
 afford her a. fair profpecSt of giving Mr. True- 
 worth fo much caufe of difcontent, as to make him 
 break off with a woman, who after what had paf- 
 VoL I. M kd 
 

<#PG# 252>
342 r/je HISTORY of 
 
 ^d made no diftin(5i:ion between him and the perfoii 
 
 he had twice vanquiihed hi the field. She knew 
 
 it would, at Icaft-j create a good deal of perplexi- 
 ty among them, and delay, if not totally pre- 
 vent, the completion of what (he fo much dread- 
 ed. 
 
 But this fcheme being rendered abortive, by the 
 feafonable difcovery Mifs Betfy had made of her per- 
 fidioufnefs, (he fet her wits to work for fome other 
 new invention, and believing that Mifs Betfy 's 
 pride would immediately take fire on the leaft fuf- 
 picion of any infult being ofl:ered, either to her 
 beauty or reputation, procured an agent to write 
 the above inferted letter —-the efFe6t of which has 
 been already fliewn. 
 
 This difappointment was the more grievous to 
 her, as (he had fo little expe£fed it : — fhe broke the 
 flicks of her fan, tore every thing that came in her 
 way, — flew about the room, like a princefs in a 
 tragedy j — wanting the means of venting the rage 
 ihe was poirefTed of in great things, fhe cxercifed 
 it in fmail. — A fine petticoat of A4ifs Betfy 's hap- 
 pening to hang on the back of a chair, (lie threw a 
 Itandiih of ink upon it, as if by accident -, and it 
 is no breach of charity to believe, would have fer- 
 ved the owner in a mrch worfe manner, if her p&w- 
 er had been equal to her will, and flie could have 
 done it wiihcut danger to herfelf. 
 
 I'oadd to the fury and diftraclion of her mind, 
 continuing ftill in her chamber, and happeniiig to 
 be' pretty near the window, (lie faw Mifs Betfy, 
 Mifs Mabel, and Mr. Trucworth pafs by in a landiiu, 
 that gentleman having, It fecms, invited thtfe la- 
 dies on a party of pleafure :• " Ycu fhall net 
 
 '' Jong cn;oy this fatisfaclion," cried fne to herfelf, 
 
 " a it be in human wit to fcparate you;" '• 
 
 but at this fight, the turbulent pii£l;ons of her foul 
 tcccmingnurc gw*r*'^£ccus, *' O msy the machine 
 
 " ti^at 
 

<#PG# 253>
Jl///} Betsy Though tLE'^s. 245 
 '** that conveys you be thrown from ofFits wheels!'* 
 purfued {he : " IVlay the wine you drink be poi- 
 " foned ! — May the firft morfcl you attempt to 
 ** fwallow, miftake ks way, and choak you in the 
 « palTage !" 
 
 Thus did {he rave, not like one poflefTed with 
 feven, but feven thoufand fiends, and had perhaps 
 remained in this wild way till }:er brain had been 
 abfolutely turned, if lady Mellafin, having a great 
 deal of company, had not pofitively commanded 
 her to come down, &ftcr having fent fevcr&l 
 times in more mild term?, to let her know what 
 friends were there. 
 
 It was fome days before the unhappy, and more 
 ■wicked, Mifs Flora, could rccollcttt her fcattcrLd 
 fenfts, enough for the contrivance of any further 
 mifchief j but thofe evil fpirit?, to which Ihe had 
 yielded but too much the maftery of her heart, and 
 all its faculties, at length infpired her with, and 
 enabled her in the execution of, a defign of the mcft 
 barbarous kind, and which, for a time, flic faw fuc- 
 cefsful, even to her moft fanguine expc61ations. 
 
 But while (he was ruminating on projeds, which 
 had neither virtue nor gencrofity for thtir patrons, 
 Mifs Betfy pafled her days in that cheaifulncis 
 which is the confi:ant companion of uncorrupteJ 
 innocence, and a mind uninfluenced by any tem- 
 peftuous paflions j — but as it is natural, even to the 
 Iwceteft tempers, to take pleafure in the mortificati- 
 on of thofe who have endeavoured to injure us with- 
 out caufc given on our parts, flie could not forbear 
 being highly diverted to fee the pains Mifs P'lora 
 took to conceal the inward difturbance of her foul ; 
 ■^the aukward excufes {he made, for the damacre 
 done her petticoat, gave her more fatisfaiiion, than 
 {he could have felt vexation for the fpoiling the bdft 
 thing (he had in the world. 
 
 Mifs Mabel, to whom Mifs Betfy had imparled 
 M 2 xhe 
 

<#PG# 254>
244- 5^^'^ HISTORY of 
 the whole of this affair, was not at all furprifed 
 at that part of the letter which related to herfelf, 
 as (lie had often been informed, by feveral of her 
 acquaintance, of the character given of her by that 
 malicious girl ; but neither of thefc young ladies 
 could be able to imagine, as they fufpedled not her 
 paflion for Mr. Trueworth, from what fource this 
 pretended enmity to him was derived. 
 
 It would certainly have greatly contributed to the 
 happincl3 of that gentleman, to have known in what 
 manner his miftrefs had refented the injuftice had 
 been done him ; but Mifs Betfy forbore to let him 
 into the fecret, as being already fufficiently convin- 
 ced of the fincerity of his affed^ion, and would not 
 put him to the trouble of giving her new proofs of 
 it, by (liewing him the ridiculous accufation, anonj- 
 moufly formed againft him. 
 
 CHAP. XXXI. 
 
 Contains fonie incidents which will he found equally 
 i7itercfiing and entertaining^ or the author is very 
 much mijlaken, 
 
 MR. Trueworth had all the reafon imaginable 
 from the whole deportment of Mifs Betfy to- 
 wards him, to believe that there wanted little more 
 for the conclufion of his marriage with her, than 
 the arrival of her two brothers ; fhe had often told 
 hirn, whenever he prcfTed her on that fcore, that 
 {he would eive no definitive anfwer, till fhe had re- 
 ceived the advice and approbation of the elder Mr. 
 Thoughtlcfs. 
 
 That gentleman was now expelled in a few days, 
 and Mr. Francis Thoughtlcfs having intelligence of 
 his being on his return, was alfo preparing to leave 
 
 L e, in order to meet him on his firH: arrival 
 
 in London 5 but during this fliort fpace of time^ 
 
 fume 
 

<#PG# 255>
Mifs Betsy Thovghtliss. 245 
 fome events fell out, which put a great damp on 
 the gaiety of thofe, who had with fo much impati- 
 ence wiflied for their approach. 
 
 Mr. Trueworth had an aunt, who befides being 
 the neareft relation he had living, and the only one 
 in London, was extremely refpcded by him, on ac- 
 count of her great prudence, exemplary virtue, and 
 the tender afFedHon (he had always teftified for him. 
 — This good lady thought herfelf bound by duty, 
 as fhc was led by love, to make a thorough enqui- 
 ry into the chara<5ler of the young pcrfon her ne- 
 phew was about to marry : flic was acquainted 
 
 with many who had been in company with Miu 
 Betfy, and were witnefTes of her behaviour; — 
 ■fhe afked the opini(in of thofe among them, whom 
 (he looked upon as the moft cmdid, concerning the 
 match nov.' on the carpet, and was extremely trou- 
 bled to find their anfwers fuch, as were v.o way con- 
 formable to the idea i'vlr. Trueworth had endea- 
 voured to infpire her with of his millrefij's perfecti- 
 ons :---they all, indeed, agreed that fhe was hand- 
 fome,— wcll-fliapcd,— genteel,— had a great deal of 
 wit, vivacity, and good- humour ; but ihook their 
 heads when any of thofe requifites to m^ike the mar- 
 riage- ftate agreeable were mentioned. 
 
 Poor Mifs Betfy, as the reader has had but too 
 much opportunity to obferve, was far from fetting 
 forth to any advantage, the real good qualities Oie 
 was poiTefled of :-— on the contrary, tiie levity of 
 her conduct rather disfigured the native innocence of 
 her mind, and the purity ot her intentions ; fo tiiat, 
 according to the poet, 
 
 * All faw her fpots, but few her brightnefs 
 ' took/ 
 
 The old lady not being able to hear any thin"- 
 concerning her intended niece, but what was great- 
 ly to her diflatisfad^ion, was continually remorulrat- 
 ing to Mr. Trueworth, that the want of folidity in 
 M 3 a wife 
 

<#PG# 256>
246 ^he HISTORY cf 
 
 a wife was one of the worft misfortunes that could 
 attend a marriage-ilate ;— -that the external beauties 
 of the perfon could not atone for the internal de-. 
 fccts of the mind ;- — that a too great gaiety du 
 cceur, frequently led women into errors without 
 their defigning to be guilty of them ; and conjured 
 him to confider well before the irrevocable words> 
 * I take you 'iiyx better *nd for worfc,' were paft, 
 how ill it would fuit, either with his honour, or his 
 peace of mind, if fhe whom he now wifbed to 
 make his partner for life fhould, after (he became 
 io^ beh<ave in the fame manner (be now did. 
 
 Mr. Trucworth liftened to what fhe faid, with 
 all the attention Tne could defire, but was too paf- 
 fionately in love to be much influenced by it : — 
 not that he did not fee there were fome miflakes in 
 the condud of Mifs Bctfy, which he could wifli 
 leformedj yet he could not look upon them as fo 
 dangerous to her virtue and reputation, and there- 
 fore omitted no arguments, which he thought 
 might juilify his choice, and clear the accufed fair 
 ene from all blame, in the eyes of a perfon, 
 whofe approbation he was very defirous of ob- 
 taining. 
 
 The warmth with which he fpake, convinced 
 his aunt, that to oppofe his inclinations in this 
 point was only warring with the winds, fhe defifted 
 from ipeaking any more againft the marriage, and 
 contented herfelf with telling him, that fmce he 
 was bent on making Mifs Betfy h*is wife, {he (hould 
 be glad if, at leaft, he would remove her into the 
 country, and prevent her returning to this town 2^s 
 long as pofiiblc. 
 
 This lafl: counfel had a great deal of weight 
 with Mr. Trueworth ;— he had often wifhed in his 
 heart, when feeing her, as he often did, emcom- 
 pafled v/ith a crowd of fuch, whom his good un- 
 ilerfbnding made him defpife^ that if ever he became 
 
 her 
 

<#PG# 257>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 247 
 her hufband, it might be in his power to prevail on 
 her, to break off acquaintance with the grcateft 
 part of thofe fhe at prefent converfed with j and 
 now being admitted to entertain her with more free- 
 dom and ferioufnefs than ever, he refolved to found 
 her fentiments on that fcore, and try to difcover 
 how far flie could relifli the retirements of a coun- 
 try life. 
 
 Accordingly, the next vifit he made to her, he 
 began to reprcfent in the moft pathetic tetms he 
 was able, the true felicity that two people, who 
 loved each other, might enjoy when remote from 
 the noife and interruption of a throng of giddy vi- 
 fitors. — ** The deity of foft defircs," faid he, 
 " flics the confufcd glare of pomp and public 
 *' flievv's J --'tis in the fhady bowers^ or on the 
 *' banks of a fweet purling ftream, he fpreads his 
 •* downy wings, and wafts ten thoufand namclefs 
 *' pleafures on the fond,- --the innocent,— and the 
 *' happy pair." 
 
 He was going on, but {he interrupted him with 
 aloud laugh: --.'< *' Hold,— hold," cried fh«, 
 •' was there ever fuch a romantic dcfcription ? --- - 
 *' I wonder how fuch filly ideas come into your 
 *' head ?--- Shady bowers ! and purling llreams !- — 
 *' Heavens, how infipid !— Well," continued {'i-\Q^ 
 *' you may be the Strephon of the woods, if vou 
 ** think fit ; but I fliall never envy the happinefs of 
 •' the Cloe that accompanies you in thcfe fine recef- 
 •' fes.-~What I to be cooped up like a tame dove, 
 ** only to coo, — and bill,--- and breed ?-- O, it 
 ** would be a delicious life indeed !" 
 
 Mr. Trueworth now perceived, to his no fmall 
 vexation, the late ferioufnefs he had obfervcd in 
 Mifs Betfy, and which had given him fo much fatis- 
 fa6^ion, was no more than a fhort-lived interval,— a 
 iudden ftartof reafon and recollection foon difiipated, 
 and that her temper, in reality, was ftill as light, 
 M 4 as 
 

<#PG# 258>
248 "^he HISTORY of 
 
 as wild, and as inconfiderate as ^ver.-— The ridi- 
 cule with which (he treated what he faid, did not, 
 however, hinder him from proceeding in the praife 
 of a country life; but happening to fay, that inno- 
 cence cviuld no where elfe be fo fecure, ihe prcfent- 
 }y toc.'k up the woid, and with a difdainful air re- 
 plied, that innocence in any one, but an idcot, 
 jriig.ht be fecure in any place ; to which he re- 
 torted, that reafon v/as at fometimes abfent, e- 
 ven in thofe who had the grcatefl fhare of it at 
 others. 
 
 Many fmart repartees pafTed between them on 
 tliib fubjc(Sl, in moft of which Mifs Betfy had the 
 better ; but Mr. Trucv/orth, not willing to give up 
 the point, reminded her thiit Solomon, the moft 
 luxuriant, and withal the wifefl: of men, pronoun- 
 ced, that all the gaieties and magnificence of the 
 •"■atth were vanity and vexation of fpirit.-— *' He 
 " did ft>," replied {lie, with a fcornful fmile ; 
 *' but it v/as not tili he had enjoyed them all, and 
 *' was grown paft the power of enjoying yet fur- 
 *' ther :---whcn I am fo, 'tis polTible I may fay the 
 " fime." 
 
 Mr. Trueworth finding fhe was pretty much 
 iiung at fome things he had faid, and confcious that 
 in this (Jifcourfe he had in fome meafure forgot the 
 rcfpeil due from a lover to his miftrefs, would not 
 purfue the topic any farther, but, as artfully as he 
 could, turned the converfation on things more a- 
 
 grecable to Mils Betfy 's way of thinking : he 
 
 could not, however, after they had parted, forbear 
 ruminating on the contempt fhe had fliewn of a 
 country life, and was not (o eafy as the lubmifllve- 
 nefs of his pailion made him affe6t to be, on taking 
 leave This was, however, a matter of flight mo- 
 ment to him, when compared with what foon after 
 cnfued. 
 
 I believe, that from the lafl letter of Mifs For- 
 ward 
 

<#PG# 259>
M'fs Betsy Thoughtless. 249 
 ward to Mifs Betfy, the reader may fufpcfl it was 
 not by a kinfman fhe was maintained ; bur it is 
 proper to be more particulai on that affair, and Ihew 
 how that unfortunate creature, finding ht-rftlf ut- 
 terly diicarded by her father, and abandoned to the 
 urmoft diftreHes,' accepted of the offer made her by 
 a rich Jew merchant, of five guineas a week, to be 
 his mifheTs. 
 
 But as few women, who have once loll: the fenfe 
 of honour, ever recover it agiin, but, on the con- 
 trary, endeavour tolofea!) Lnfe of (hame a Ho, de- 
 vote themfelvcs to vice, and act whatever intereil 
 or inch'natlon prompts them to; Mifj; Forward could 
 not content herfclf with the embraces, nor allow- 
 ance of her keeper, but received both the prefcnis 
 and carefTes of as many as Ihe had charms to at- 
 tract. 
 
 Sir Bazii I/Oveit wa? a great favourite with her, 
 and if among fuch a pluraJity one might be faiJ ta 
 have the preference, it was he : this young ba- 
 ronet had been intimately acquainted with Mr.True- 
 worth abroad ; ■ they had travelled toocthtr 
 through the greateft part of Italy, and had been 
 feparated only by Mr. Trueworth's being called 
 
 home, on account of fome family affair. Sir 
 
 Bazil being but lately arrived, they had not feen each 
 other fince, 'till meeting by accident in a coffee- 
 houfe, they renewed their former friend (hip. — After 
 the ufual compliments, Mr. Trucworth propofcd 
 pafling the evening together : to which Sir Buzil re- 
 plied, that he (hould be glad of the opportunity, 
 but was engaged to fup with a lady ; but f^iid he, 
 after a paufe, 'tis where I can be free, and you 
 fhall go with me. — To u^hichthe other having con- 
 fcnted. Sir Bazil told him, as they were going towards 
 the houfe, that there would be no occafion to ufe 
 much ceremony ; for it was only to a lady of plea- 
 furehe was conducting him ; but added, that fhe 
 M 5 was 
 

<#PG# 260>
250 rz-f H I S T O R Y of 
 
 was a fine girl,— feemcd to have been well brought 
 up, --had been but lately come upon the town, 
 and behaved with more modefty than moft of her 
 profellion. 
 
 Mr. Trueworth had never any great relifh for 
 the converfation of thcfe fort of women, much lefs 
 now, when his whole heart was taken up with an 
 honourable paffion for a perfon, who, in fpite of 
 the little errors of her condudt, he thought deferv- 
 ing of his afFe(S^ions ; yet as he had given his pro- 
 mifc, he imagined, that to go back would be too 
 precifc, and fubje6t him to the raillery of his kfs 
 fcrupulous friend. 
 
 Mifs Forward, for it was fhe to whom this vi- 
 fit was made, received them in a manner, which 
 juflilied the character Sir Bazil had given of her.— 
 There was, however, a certain air of libcrt'inifm, 
 both in her looks and geflures, which would have 
 convinced Mr. Trueworth, if he had not been told 
 ib before, that fhe was one of thofe unhappy crea- 
 tures, who make traffic of their beauty. The gen- 
 tlemen had not been there above a quarter of an 
 hour, before a maid-fervant came into the room, 
 and told Mifs P'orward, that a young lady, who faid 
 her name was Thoughtlefs, was at the door in a 
 
 chair, and defired to fee hers *' O my dear 
 
 *' Mifs Betfy Thoughtlefs," cried {he, defire her 
 
 ^' to walk up immediately." This is lucky," 
 
 faid Sir Bazil, " I wanted a companion for my 
 *' friend, — iiow each man will have his bird."— — 
 " Huili, " cried Mifs Forward, *' I can aflure 
 *' you fhe is virtuous, — take care what you fay." 
 
 Mr. 'Frueworth was fo much alarmed at hear^ 
 inci: the name of Mifs Betfy, that being retired to 
 a Vv'indow, in order to recover himfelf from the 
 corifufum he was In, that he heard not what Mifs 
 Forvv'ard had fuid to Sir Bazil : — Mifs Betfy pre, 
 fently cnterij.g the room, Mifs Forward ran to em- 
 brace 
 

<#PG# 261>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 2^1 
 brace her, faying, " My dear Mifs Betfv, hoiv 
 * glad am I to fee you ! — To which the ether re- 
 ** turned, My dear Mifs Forward, how afhamed 
 *' am I to have been fo long abfent ! — but one 
 *' foolifli thmg or other has (lill prevented my 
 ** coming." 
 
 Sir Bazil then faluted her with a great deal of 
 politenefs, though with Icfs rcfpedt than doubtlefs 
 he would have done, had he fcen her in any other 
 place. — Mr. Trueworth, who by this time had re- 
 folved in what manner he fliould adi, now turned 
 and advance towards the company, — Mifs Bctfy on 
 feeing him, cried out, in fome furprife, '^ Mr. 
 *' Trueworth ! good God ! v/ho thought of lind- 
 ** ing you here?" — " You did not, madam, I 
 ** dare anfvver," replied he with a very grave air, 
 *' and as I little expected the honour of meeting 
 •' you here." — O, you are acquainted thtn, faid 
 Sir Bazil, laughing, '* this is merry enough, — I 
 *' find we are all right." 
 
 Mr. Trueworth made no dirc(Sl anfwcr to this, 
 but endeavoured to afiume a gaiety conformable to 
 that of the company he was in -.---after fome lit- 
 tle time being paft in difcourfe on ordinary affairs, 
 Mifs Forward took Mifs Betfy into the next room 
 to return the money flie had been fo kind to lend 
 her at Mrs. Nightfhade's, and told her, fhe had 
 much to {jij to her, but could not be fo rude to 
 leave the gentlemen for any long time.-- While 
 they were abfent, which indeed was not above half 
 a minute, " This is a delicious girl," faid Sir Ba- 
 zil to Mr. Trueworth, " i'faith, Charles, you will 
 •' have the beft of the market to-night."---What 
 reply Mr. Trueworth would have made is uncer- 
 tain,-— the ladies returned that inftant, and tlie 
 converfation became extremely fprightly, though, 
 on Sir Bazil's part, fjmctimes interfperfcd with ex- 
 preilions not altogether confiftent with that deco- 
 

<#PG# 262>
252 ri'^ H I S T O R Y of 
 
 rum, he would have obferved towards women of 
 reputation. 
 
 Mifs Betfy, far from thinking any ill herfclf, 
 took every thing as well meant, and replied to 
 whatever was uttered by this gay young gentleman, 
 with a freedom, which, to thofe who knew her 
 not perfe£lly, might juftly render her liable to cen- 
 fure.--Mr. Trueworth would fain have taken fome 
 fhare, if poflible, in this converfation, in order to 
 conceal the perplexity of his thoughts, but all his 
 endeavours were ineffe(?tual, and though his words 
 w^ere fornctimes gay, the tone with which he fpoke 
 them plainly (hewed, that his heart was very far 
 from correfponding with his expreflions. 
 
 Sir Eazil having ordered a handfome fupper, 
 Mifs Bctfy flayed till it was over, and then rofe up, 
 and took her leave, faying, ihe was obliged to go 
 home, and write fome letters. — As none of them 
 had any equipage there, a hackney coach was or- 
 dered to be called, and Mr. Trueworth offering to 
 accompany her, Sir Bazil, on waiting on them 
 down flairs, faid to him fome merry things on the 
 occafion, which, though Mifs Betfy did not com- 
 prehend, her lover underflood the meaning of but 
 too well for his peace of mind. 
 
 CHAP. XXXII. 
 
 Is yet more Inter ejling than the former, 
 A N Y one may judge what a heart, pofTcfTed 
 j\ of fo fincere and honourable a flame, as that 
 ©f Mr, Trucworth's, muft feel, to fee the beloved 
 object fo intimate with a common proflitute j it 
 (hall fufHce dierefore to fay, that his anxieties were 
 fuch as prevented him from being able to recover 
 himfclf enough to fpeak to Mifs Betfy on that fub- 
 ie«£t. as he would do ; he forbore mentioning it at 
 ^ * all. 
 

<#PG# 263>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 253 
 all, and faid very little to her on any other, while 
 they were in the coach, and having feen her fafc 
 into Mr. Goodman's houfc, took his leave, and 
 went home, where he pafTcd a night of more vexa- 
 tion than he ever had before experienced. 
 
 Fain would he have found fomc excufe for Mifs 
 Betfy's condu£t in this point,--- fain would he have 
 believed hjr innocent as fhe was lovely, but couKl 
 not tell how to conceive there was a polhbility for 
 true virtue to take delight in the company of vice ; 
 but were there even fuch a thing in nature, the 
 fliew of encouraging an infamous action, he knew 
 not how to brook in a woman he intended to make 
 his wife. 
 
 He now acknowledged the juftice of his aunt's 
 remunftrances ; and by what the levity of M\(i 
 Bctfy made him at prefcnt endure, forcfaw what hii 
 honour and his peace of mind muft hereafter con- 
 tinually endure, if he (hould once become a huf- 
 
 band ; never were thoughts fo divided,— fo 
 
 flu(5tuating as his; — his good underftanding, and 
 jcaloufy of honoyr, convinces! him, there could 
 be no lafting happinefs with a pcrfon of Mifs Betfy's 
 temper ; but then the paflion he had for her, flat- 
 tered him with the hopes, that as all the faults (he 
 was guilty of, fprung rather from want of confidc- 
 ration than defign, fhe might be reafoned out of 
 them, when once he had gained fo far upon her af- 
 fections, as to find he might take the liberty of 
 painting them to her in their proper colours. 
 
 He often afked himfelf the queftion, whether 
 he could be able to break with her or not ; and 
 finding by the pangs, which the very idea of an 
 utter reparation inflicSted on him, that he could not, 
 had no other meafures to take than to fubmit with 
 
 patience, to appear fatrsfied with every thing 
 
 that pleafcd her, aiid to contrive all the methods he 
 could, without her p^^rceiving he did fo> of Iteahns;, 
 

<#PG# 264>
254 ^^e HIST DRY of 
 
 by gentle degrees, into her mind, a difrellfli of fuch 
 things as were unbecoming in her. 
 
 He had but juft rofe from a bed, which that 
 night had afforded him but Httle repofe, when he 
 was told Sir Bazil Loveit, to whom he had given 
 liis diredlions the day before, was come to wait up* 
 on him.--- Mr. Trueworlh was very glad of it, be- 
 ing impatient to undeceive him in the opinion he 
 found he had entertained of Mifs Betfy.---They 
 had not been three minutes together before the o- 
 ther gave him an opportunity, by fome facetious 
 interrogatories concerning the tranfaciions of the 
 pad night, and among the red, after looking round 
 the room, aflced him, how he had difpofed of his 
 pretty Beefy ? To all v.'i)ich Mr. Trueworth re- 
 plied, with a very ferious air, *' Sir Bazil, though 
 " I muft ov/n there are many appearances to juftify 
 *' your midake, yet, I hope, my word and ho- 
 ** nour will out-ballance them.--- I do adure you, 
 " Sir, that lady, whom you think and fpeak fo 
 *' lightly of, Is a woman of fortune, family, and 
 *' reputation."—— I am forry then,'' faid Sir Ba- 
 '' zil, very much furprifed, " I treated her in the 
 *' manner I did. My Nancy, indeed," con- 
 tinued he, meaning Mifs Forward, " told me fiie 
 " was virtuous, but I did not regard what ihe faid 
 
 ** on that fcore ; 1 know it is a trick among 
 
 '* them to fct off one another, to draw in 
 *' us men : but priihee, dear Charles, are you in 
 *' earned ?" Mr. Trueworth then, after hav- 
 ing made a fecond adeveration that he was dncerc 
 in what he faid, proceeded to give him fome ac- 
 count of Mifs Betfy's family, circumdances, and 
 manner of life ; adding, that nothing could be 
 more furprifmg to him, than to have met her in 
 that place ; *' but," faid he, *' ihe mud certainly 
 *' be unacquainted with the chara6ler of the wo- 
 •* man die came to vidt." 
 
 ** Such 
 

<#PG# 265>
Mlfs Betsy Thoughtless. 255 
 
 ** Such a thing might pofTibly happen,** replied 
 Sir Bazil, *' and I think you would do well to give 
 
 " her a hint of it." Doubtlefs, "(cried the other, 
 
 *' lam bound to do fo, firft by my own honour, 
 *•• and next by the friendihlp I have for fome of 
 " her kindred." — No farther difcourfe pafled be- 
 tween them on this fcore, and the remaining time 
 they were together, being taken up on matters al- 
 together foreign to the bufinefs of this hiftory, there 
 is no occafionfor making any mention of it. 
 
 Sir Bazil ftayed (o long, that when he had ta- 
 ken his leave, it was too late for Mr. Trucworth 
 to make a morning vifit to Mifs Bctfy, as he in- 
 tended to have done, fo was obliged to defer it till 
 the afternoon, though fince his firft acquaintance 
 with her, he never had felt more impatience to fee 
 her. 
 
 As he had much in his head to fay to her, on the 
 fubjecSt of the preceding day, he went as foon as he 
 thought dinner v/as entirely over at Mr. Goodman's, 
 in order to have an opportunity of talking with 
 her, before any other company came in : — (he was 
 then in her chamber dreffing, but he waited not 
 long before fhe came down, and appeared more 
 lovely and dazzling in his eyes than ever. — This 
 happened to be the firft day of her putting on a 
 very rich, and extremely well-fancied gown, and 
 either becaufe it was more becoming than any of 
 thofe he had feen her in before, or becaufe of the 
 pleafure ladies of her age and humour generally 
 feel on fuch occafions, a more than ufual brightnefs 
 (hone in her eyes, and was difi-'ufed through all her 
 air; and after having made her fome compliments 
 on the elegance of her tafte in drcfs, '• I fu. pofe, 
 '* madam," faid he, " thus fet forth, and equip- 
 " pcd for corqueft, you do not mean to ft ay at 
 ** home this evening."---*' No, indeed," replied 
 ihe, ** I am told there is a new tragedy to be atftcd 
 
 " to-niii,ht 
 

<#PG# 266>
256 The HISTORY $f 
 
 *' to n'uht at Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, and I would 
 *' not for the world mifii the firft night of a new 
 "' play." 
 
 On this Mr. Trueworth afked if he might have 
 leave to wait upon her there?-—" With all my 
 " heart," anfwered (he, " none of the gemlemen 
 " of my acquaintance know any thing of my go- 
 " ing, fj could not offer to gallant me, and there 
 " is onlv one lady goes with me."---'* Mifs Ma- 
 *' bel, i guefs," cied Mr. Trueworth.— No," 
 anfwered Mifs Betfy, " (he is engaged to the other 
 *' houfe to-night, fo I fent to defire the favour of 
 *' that lady, you faw me with laft nigiit, to give, 
 *' me her company." 
 
 " You will have more if you have her^^, I doubt 
 *' not," faid he ; *' but fure, madam, you can- 
 *' not think of being feen with a woman of her 
 " fame, in a place fo public as the playhoufe."--- 
 Mifs Betfy was aftonifhed to hear him fpeak in this 
 manner, and demanded of him, in fomewhat of a 
 haughty tone, what it was he meaned ? " Firft,, 
 *' madam," refumed Mr. Trueworth, " give me 
 *' leave to a(k you, how long fmce, and by what 
 '' accident, your intimacy with this woman com- 
 *' menced ?"---Though your interrogatories," re- 
 plied (he, " are made in fuch a fafliion, as might 
 ** well excufe me from anfwering them, yet for 
 *' once I may give you the fatisfad^ion you defire; 
 <« -—Mifs Forward and I were together at the 
 *' boarding-fchool,— we mutually took a liking to 
 ** each other, I believe from a parity of humours 
 *' and inclinations, and fmce her coming to Lon- 
 ** don have renewed that friendfhip we began in 
 *' our more tender years.'* 
 
 " Friendfhips begun in childhood, madam,'* 
 anfwered he with a very grave air, *' ought to be 
 *' continued or broke off, according as the parties 
 ** perfevere in innocence, or degenerate into vice 
 
 *' anJ 
 

<#PG# 267>
• c 
 
 Mifs Betsy Thoughtless, ic^y 
 
 and infamy. "-This caution ought to be more pe- 
 " culiarly obferved in perfons of your fex, as re- 
 •' putation in you once loft, is never to be rc- 
 ** tricved.-- -Remember, madam, what your fa- 
 *' vourite author Mr. Rowc fays on this occafion : 
 *' In vain with tears the lofs fhe may deplore, "J 
 " In vain look back to what fhe was before, ?• 
 " She fcts, hke ftars that fall, to rife no more. 3 
 Mifs Betfy was fo piqued at thefe remonftranccs, 
 that ilie had fcarce patience to contain herfelf, 'till 
 he had given over fpeaking. **Goodlack," cried The, 
 " how fcntentious you are grown !— -but, I hope, 
 " you have not. the infolcnce to imagine I am 
 '* guilty of any thing that might juftly^ call my re- 
 " putation in qi<eftion r"— No, madam," replied 
 he, " far be it from me to fufpeift you of any 
 *' thouglits, but fuch as might become the purity 
 " of angels ;-— but the more bright you are, the 
 *' more ibould we lament to fee the native luftre 
 *' of your mind clouded, and blemifhed by the 
 *' faults of others.— -Permit me, madam, to tell 
 *' you, that to continue an intimacy with a woman 
 *' of Mifs Forward's charader, muft infallibly 
 *' draw you into inconveniencies, which you want 
 *' but to forefce to tremble at." 
 
 " If you have the afFeClion for me you pre- 
 *' tend," faid fhe, haugiitily, '' and could forefee 
 *' the averfion I have to a cenforious temper, it is 
 *' yourfeif would have caufe to tremble.— 1 love 
 " Mifs Forward, and neither know, nor will be- 
 lieve, any ill of her. Whenever I am con- 
 vinced, that (lie is unwortr.y of my friendlhip, 
 it muft be by her owr actions, not by the re- 
 port of others.— Therefore, Mr. Trueworth, 
 if you defire to continue on good terms with me, 
 ** you muft forbear to interfere with what com- 
 *' pany I keep, nor pretend to prefcribe rules for 
 *' my condu6f, at leaft till you have more right to 
 •' do fo." « I fhali 
 

<#PG# 268>
25^ ne HISTORY of 
 
 " I fliall never, madam, prefumc to pKefcribe,'* 
 replied he ; " but (hall always think it my duty to 
 " advife you, in a matter, which (o nearly con- 
 *' cerns, not only yourfelf, but all who have any 
 *' relation to you, cither by blood or affection."— - 
 Though thefe words, as well as all he had faidon 
 this occafion, v/erc uttered in the moft refpedliul 
 accents, yet Mifs Bet/y was not able to imagine the 
 leaft contradiction fulted with the charafter of a lo- 
 ver, was offended beyond all meafure; — fhe frown- 
 ed,-- rofe haftily from her chair,---vvalked about 
 the room in a difordcred motion, ---told him the 
 nature of the acquaintance between them did not 
 authorife the liberties he took,-— that (he would not 
 bear it, and defired, that he would cither leave 
 her, or change the eonverfation to fomewhat more 
 agreeable. 
 
 Mr. Trueworth, who as yet had faid little, ^ irt 
 comparifon with what he intended 'tc fay on this 
 fubjedt, was fo much fbocked at the impoilibilitj 
 he found of engaging her attention, that for fom« 
 time he v/as incapable of fpcaking one v/crd.--- 
 During this paufe, a fcrvant prcfcnted a letter ttf 
 Mifs BetA'.--" O !'* cried fhe, as foon as fhe 
 looked on the fuperfcription, ^* It is from my dear 
 *' Mifs Forward ;■— I hope nothing has happened 
 *' to prevent her going v/ith me to the play."—* 
 She made this exclamation merely to vex Mr. 
 Trueworth, and for that purpofe, alfo, read the 
 billet loud enough for him to hear what it contain- 
 ed, which was as follows : 
 
 To Mil's Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 " My dear Mifs Betfy^ 
 '* Q I N C E I received your meflage, I got a 
 *' i3 perfon to fecure places for us in the box, fo 
 *' wc need not go till fix o'clock ; but I am quite 
 
 alone. 
 

<#PG# 269>
Af//} Betsy Thoughtless. 259 
 ** alone, and if you are difengaged (hould be glad 
 *' you would come dirc6tly to her, who is ever, 
 
 *' With the moft perfeft amity, 
 
 '« My dear Mifs Betfy, 
 
 •' Your very much obliged, 
 
 " And humble fervant, 
 
 *' A. Forward." 
 
 ** Bid the meflenger," faid Mifs Bctfy to the fer- 
 vant, " tell the lady that I will wait upon her this 
 
 " moment, and then call me a chair.— I 
 
 *' muft comply with the fummons I have juft re- 
 '' ceived," faid llie, turning to Mr. IVueworth, 
 " fo you muft excufe my leaving you, for I will 
 *' not ftrain your complaifcince to accompany me 
 *' where I am going; but fliall be glad to fee you 
 *' when you are in a better humour." 
 
 ** I am ready, madam, to attend you any where,* 
 *' faid Mr. Trueworth, even to Mifs Forward's, 
 
 ^« and will pafs the whole evening with you, 
 
 " if you pleafe, in her apartment ; but, 1 be- 
 
 *' feech you, do not think of going to the play 
 
 *' with a woman of her clafs; do not expofe 
 
 " yourfclf in a place where fo many eyes will be 
 
 " upon you : reflect, for heaven's fake, what 
 
 " your modefty will fuffer, in feeing yourfelf gazed 
 " and pointed at, by thofe to whom fhe fells her 
 
 " favours ; and reficd yet farther, what they 
 
 " will judge of 3'ou." *' You grow fcurrilous, 
 
 " fir,"cried fhe, ready to burft with paflion, " I 
 
 '* will hear no more." Then running to the 
 
 door, afked if the chair was come, and being told 
 it was, " Farewel, fir," faid fhe, as (he was go- 
 ing into it, <* when I want a fpy to infped^, or a 
 " governor to direct; my a6tions, the choice, pcr- 
 ** haps, may fall on you." 
 
 Mr. Trueworth, who, at this treatment, was 
 not quite mafter of himfelf, retorted, with fomc 
 
 warmth, 
 

<#PG# 270>
26o r/v H I S T O R Y oj 
 
 warmth, and loud enough to be heard hy her, is the 
 chairmen were carr^^ing her to the ftcps of the houfe, 
 *' The choice, madam, perhaps, may not be yours 
 
 " to make." With thefe words he went haftily 
 
 away, half refjlving in his mind never to fee 
 her more. 
 
 CHAP. XXXIIL 
 
 Cannot fail of exciting compajjion in fome readers^ 
 though it may move other i to laughter. 
 
 TH E few remonftrances Mifs Betiy would 
 vouchfafe to liften to from Mr. Trueworth, 
 had a much greater eftc£t upon her mind, than her 
 pride, and the exceliive homage fhe cxpedted from 
 her lovers, would f jffer to make fhew of, or than 
 
 he himfelf imagined. She had too much difcern- 
 
 ment, heedlefs as foe was, not to know he was 
 ?.bove any little malicious inuendos ; but, on tb« 
 contrary, was extremely cautious in ;egard to the 
 
 character of whomfoever he fpoke \ ihe feared 
 
 therefore he had but too good grounds for the un- 
 eafinefs he exprfffed, for her continuing a corrc- 
 
 fpondence with Mils Forward ; fhe knew that 
 
 fhe had been faulty, and could not be allured fhe 
 was not flill fo ; and it was more owing to her im- 
 patience to be afccnained of the truth, than to any 
 real rcfentment (h^r had conceived againft Mr. True- 
 worth, that fhe complied with the invitation of her 
 now fufpLcSted friend, and reiolved to put the que- 
 ffion home to her, concerning her prefent manner 
 of life, and the means by which (he was fupported : 
 —fhe had found her removed from the loweft 
 degree of penury and wretchednefs into a flate, equal 
 to v.'hat fhe could have been miftrefs of, had flie 
 been re-eftablifhed in the favour of her father ; and 
 now, for the iiril time, began to think it ftrange 
 
 fhe 
 

<#PG# 271>
il^y} Betsy Thought LESS. 261 
 
 (he (hould be (o^ from the mere bounty of a diftant 
 relation, to whom in her utmoft diftrcfs fhe had 
 never applied, nor even once mentioned in the re- 
 cital of her melancholy hiftory : " I will talk 
 
 *' to her," faid flje to herftlf, " watch carefully, 
 " not only the replies ilie makes t® what I fay, 
 '* but alfo her very looks, unp^rceiving my fufpi- 
 " cions, and if I find the leaft room to believe 
 " what Mr. Trueworih has infinuated, (haU pity, 
 " but will never fee her more." 
 
 In this prudent difpofition did {he enter the lodg- 
 ings of Mifs Forward, but had no opportunity for 
 
 the execution of her purpofe ; fome company, 
 
 which (he hcrfclf thought, by their behaviour, to be 
 not of the heft fort, happening to be juil come be- 
 fore her, and departed not till it was time to go to 
 
 the play. Mifs Beify was more than once about 
 
 to tell Mifs P^orward, that (he lud changed her 
 mind, and would not go ; but her complaifance, as 
 having been the perfon who made the (ud propofal, 
 as often flopped her mf>uth. 
 
 In fine, they went, but the houfe being very full, 
 and the fellow, who had been fent to keep places 
 for them, going fome what too late, they were 
 obliged to content themfelvcs with fitting in the thi;d 
 row. — This, at another time, would have been a 
 matter of fome mortification to Mifs Betfy ; but in 
 the humour fhe now was, to fhew hcrfelf was the 
 Jeafl of her care — .Never had flie entered any place of 
 
 publick entertainment with fo little fiitisfadion ; 
 
 Mr. Trueworth's words ran very much in her mind; 
 
 fhe had loft no part of them, and though fhe 
 
 could not bring herfelf to approve of the freedom 
 he had taken, yet, in her heart, fhe couid not tor- 
 bear confefling, that his admonitions tefiifyed the 
 nioft zealous and tender care for her reputation ; 
 and if given by any one, except a lover, would have 
 demanded more of her tliauki than her rcfentment 
 
 But* 
 

<#PG# 272>
262 The HISTORY cf 
 
 But, alas ! thofe ferious confiderations were but 
 
 of fliort duration :— the brillant audience, the 
 
 mufick,-— the moving fcenes exhibited on the ftage, 
 and above all the gallantries, with which herfelFand 
 Mifs Forward were treated, by feveral gay young 
 gentlemen, who, between the acts, prefented them 
 with fruits and fweet-meats, foon diffipated all thofe 
 reflections, which it was fo much her intereft to have 
 cherifhed, and fhe once more relapfed into her for- 
 mer felf. 
 
 Towards the end of the play, there were two 
 rakes of diftin6lion, that ftuck very clofc to them, 
 and when it was ended, took the liberty to invite 
 them to fup at a tavern j-'-Mifs Betfy ftarted at 
 the motion, but was very well pleafed to find Mifs 
 Forward fhewed an equal diflike to it.-—*' You 
 *' will give us leave then," cried one of the gentle- 
 men, " to guard you fafc home, ladies V 
 
 " That I think, my dear,'' faid Mifs Forward to 
 Mifs Betfy, *' may be granted, for the f^ke of 
 " being protected from the infults of thofe, who 
 " may know lefs how to behave tov/ards our fex.*' 
 
 Mifs Betfy making no oppofition, they all four 
 went in a hackney-coach to Mifs Forward's lodg- 
 ing, it being agreed upon between them, that Mifs 
 Betfy {hould be, fet down there, and take n chair 
 from thence to Mr. Goodman's. ---Nothing inde- 
 cent, nor that could be any way {hocking to the 
 moft ftri6l modefty, being offered during their paf- 
 fage, on their alighting from the coach at Mr. 
 Screener's door, Mifs Forward thought, that to 
 afk them to come in would incur no ccnfure from 
 her fair friend, as they had behaved with fo much 
 civility and complaifance ;— accordingly Ibe did fo, 
 and they, who expc6ted no lefs, took each maa 
 his lady by the hand, and immediately tript up 
 ftairs. 
 
 Mifs Betfy did not prefently make any offer to 
 
 go 
 

<#PG# 273>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. i6^ 
 go home, becaufe (he thought it would appear very 
 odd in her to kave her companion, witli two ftrange 
 gentlemen.— She little gueiTed the defigns they had 
 in their heads, and doubted not but they would 
 foon take leave ; --flie did not, however, continue 
 in this miftake for many minutes, for one of them 
 drawing Mifs Forward to a vt^indow, in order to 
 fpeak to her with more privacy, the other, that he 
 might have the better opportunity to do fo, ad- 
 
 drefTed himfcif to Mifs Be.fy, '' How kiliiiTg 
 
 " handfome you arc," faid he, taking her by both 
 her hands, and looking full in her face, *' VVhat a 
 *' pity it is you did not ihine in the front to-night ? 
 *' By my foul you would have out-dazzled all the 
 *' titled prudes about you.'* 
 
 " Pifli,'* replied flie, " I went to fee the play, 
 
 " not to be feen myfclf." '' Not to be fcen I" 
 
 cried he, " why then have you taken all this pains 
 " to empty the whole quiver of Cupid's arrows to 
 *' new point thofe charms you have received from 
 *' nature ? — ^Why does the jcflamine, and the 
 *' blooming violet play wanton in your liair ?• 
 *' Why is the patch with fo much art placed on 
 *' the corner of this ruby lip,- and here another 
 •' to mark out the arched fymmetry of the jetty 
 *' brown ? Why does the glittering folitaire hang 
 *' pendant on the fnowy breaft, but to attract, and 
 '* allure us poor, admiring men, into a pleafing 
 " ruin r" 
 
 Mifs Betfy anfwcred this raillery in its kind, and 
 as (he had a great deal of ready v\'it, would foon 
 perhaps, had the fame ftrain continued, have left 
 the beau nothing to fay for himfelf ; but Mifs For- 
 ward, and the other gentleman having finiflied what 
 they had to (iiy, comini^ towards them, put an end 
 to it. " What do you think," cried Mifs For- 
 ward, " this gentleman fwears he won't go out of 
 *' the houfe, till I eivc him leave to fend for a fup- 
 
 " per V 
 

<#PG# 274>
464 ' The HISTORY of 
 
 •« per ?**— — " You may do as you pleafe,*' faid 
 Mils Betfy, " but I muft be cxcufed from flaying 
 
 *' to partake of it." Whether (he was really in 
 
 earneft or not, is not very material, but her refufal 
 was looked upon only as a feint, and they prefled 
 her to tarry in fuch a manner, as fhc could not well 
 avoid complying, even though (he had been more 
 averfe, in effed, than for fomc time fhe pretended 
 to be. 
 
 The converfation was extremely lively, and tho* 
 fprinkled with fome double entendres, could not be 
 faid to have any thing indecent, or that could raife 
 a blufh in the faces of women who were accuflomed 
 to much company.— Mifs Betfy had her (hare in all 
 the innocent part of what was faid, and laughed at 
 that which was no lefs fo.-— But not to dwell on 
 trifles, (he forgot all the cautions given her by Mr. 
 Trueworth,-— confidered not that flie was in the 
 company of two ftrange gentlemen, and of a wo** 
 man vv^hofe characSkr was fufpciled ; nor, though 
 fhe had a watch by her fide, regarded not how the 
 liours paiTed on, 'till fhe heard the nightly monitor 
 of time, cry, '' Paft twelve o'clock, and a cloudy 
 "• morning." 
 
 After this fhe would not be prevailed upon to 
 fl:ay, and defircd Mifs Forward to fend fomcbody 
 for achair,— -*' A chair, madam," cried that gen- 
 tleman, who, of the two, had been mofl particu- 
 lar in his addrefles to her, " you cannot furc ima- 
 " gine we fliould fufFer you to go home alone at 
 " this late hour ?"---'' I apprehend no great dan- 
 " ger," faid fhe, though I confefs it is a thing I 
 '* have not been accuftomed to,"— He replied, 
 that in his company fhe fhould not begin the e.vpc- 
 riment :— on this a coach was ordered. ---Mifs Bet- 
 fv made fome few fcruples at committing herfelf to 
 
 thecondu6l of a pcrfon fo little known to her. 
 
 " All acquaintance muft have a beginning," faid 
 
 he. 
 

<#PG# 275>
M//5 Betsy Thoughtless. 26,5 
 he, '' the mod intimate friends were perfe»5l ftrang- 
 
 *' ers at firft. You may depend upon it I am a 
 
 " man of honour, and cannot be capable of an 
 ungenerous action." 
 
 Little more was faid on the occafion, and beins 
 told a coach was at the door, they took leave tjf 
 Mifs Forward, and the other gentleman, and went 
 down itairs. ■■ Qn flepping into the coach, Mifs 
 Betfy dired^ed the man where to drive ; bur the 
 gentleman, unheard by her, ordered him to go to 
 
 the bagnio in Orange-ftreet. They were no 
 
 fooner feated, and the windows drav/n up, to keep 
 out the cold, than Mifs Uetfy was alarmed with a 
 treatment, which her want of confidcration made 
 her little expe6t : — fmce the gentleman-commoner, 
 at Oxford, no man had ever attempted to take the 
 liberties which her prefent companion now did :— 
 fhe ftruggled, — flic repelled with all her might, the 
 
 infolent prcfTures of his lips and hands- " Is 
 
 •* this," cried fhe, " the honour I was to depend up- 
 
 *' on ? Is it thus you prove youifelf incapable 
 
 *' of an ungenerous adionr" " Accufe me 
 
 " not," faid he, *' 'till you have reafon.- I 
 
 " have been bit once, and have made a vow never 
 
 to fettle upon any woman while I live again ; 
 
 r-but you fliall fare never the worfe for that, 
 
 1 will ma^e you a handfome prefent before 
 
 we part, and if you can be conflant will allow 
 
 you fix guineas a week." 
 
 She was {o confounded at the fiift mention of 
 this impudent propofal, that fhe had not the povyer 
 of interrupting him \ but recovering herfelf, as well 
 as flie was able, *' Heavens!'* cried (he, " what 
 " means all this ? —What do you take me for ?"— 
 *' Take you for," anfwered he laughing, '* pri- 
 " thee, dear ^irl, no more of thefe airs :- I take 
 " you for a pretty,— kind, --obliging creature, and 
 " fuch I hope to find vou, as foon as we come 
 
 Vgl. L N «» into 
 

<#PG# 276>
266 The II I S TOR Y cf 
 " into a proper pl.ice.— In the mean time," con- 
 tinued he, liopping her mouth with kifles, " none 
 *' of this affected coynefs." 
 
 7'he fright fhe was in, aided by difdain and rage, 
 now infpired her with an unufual llrength , — fhe 
 broke from him, thrud: down the window,—- and 
 with one breath called him monfter, —villain ; — • 
 with the next fcreamed out to the coachman to 
 Hop, and finding he regarded not her cries, would 
 have throv/n herfelf out, if not forcibly withheld 
 by the gentleman, who began now to be a little 
 ftartled at her refolute behaviour, — " What is all 
 " this for,'* faid he ? *' would you break your 
 ** neck, or venture being crufhed to pieces by the 
 *^ wheels ?" — '*' Any thing," cried fhe, burfHng 
 into tears, " I will venture, fuffcr any thing, 
 " rattier than be fubjedted to infults, fuch as you 
 " have dared to treat me with " 
 
 Though the perfon by whem Mifs Bctfy was 
 thus dangeroufiy attacked was a libertine, or, ac- 
 cording to the more genteel and modifh phrafe, a 
 man of pleafure, yet he wanted neither honour, 
 nor good fcnfc :--hc had looked on Mils Betfy as a 
 woman of the town, by feeing her with one who 
 v;as fo ; and her too great freedom in converfation, 
 gave him no caufe to a^ter his opii i )n ; but the 
 manner in which (lie had endeavoured to rebuff his 
 more near approaches, greatly daggered him :— 
 he knew not what to think, but remained in filent 
 cogitation for fome minutes, and though he held 
 her fafl: clafped round the waffc, it war) o Ay to pre- 
 vent her from attempting the violence fhe had threat- 
 ened, not to offer any towards her : — " Is it pof- 
 *' fible," faid he, after this paufe, *' that you ^rc 
 *' virtuous r" — " I call- luaven to witnefs," an- 
 fwcred fhe, with a voice faultering, through the 
 exeefs of terror and indignatioji, " that I never have 
 '^' entertained one tlxought xhcX was not flri6l)y fo ; 
 
 " — ^that 
 

<#PG# 277>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 267 
 
 *' that I dcteft and fcorn thofe wretched crea- 
 
 *' tures of the number of whom you imagine me 
 *' to be one ; and that I would fooner die the worft 
 ** of deaths, than live with infamy. — Yes, Sir, be 
 *' aiTijred," continued flie, gathering more courage, 
 " that v/hatever appearances may be this fatal night 
 ** agalnft me, lam of a family of fome confide- 
 " ration in tlic world, and am blcft with a fortune, 
 " which fcts me above the low temptations of dc- 
 " figning men/' 
 
 As flie had ended thefe words, they came to the 
 bagnio, and the coach immediately flopping, two 
 or three waiters came running to opc^n the door, on 
 which Mifs Bt^tfy, more terrified than ever, flirii kcd 
 in a mod piteous manner, " O God !" cried fliP, 
 " "^Vhat's here ?--. Where am I? -- What will 
 " become of me ?" And at that indant recollected, 
 that no help was near ; — that flie was in the pov.- 
 er of a man, whofe aim was her eternal ruin ;— - 
 and that it was by her own indifcretion alone, this 
 mifchief had fallen on her, was fo overcome with 
 the dread, -the fname,--- the horror, as flie then 
 fuppofcd of her inevitable fate, that flie was very 
 near falling i\,to a fwoon. 
 
 I'he gentleman difcovering, by the light of the 
 lamps at the bagnio door, the condition flic was in, 
 was truly touched with it. — " Retire,** faid he, 
 hadily, to the follows, *' we do not want you." 
 — Then throwing himfelf on his knees before 
 her, " Let this podure, madam," continued he, 
 *' obtain your pardon, " .^nd at the fame time eafe 
 '* you of all apprehenfions on m}' fcore." — " May 
 '* 1 believe you ?" faid flie, ftill weeping. — *' You 
 ^' may, replied he ; then rifling, and placing him- 
 felf on the feat oppcfite to her, " I lox e my 
 
 .'* pleafures, and think it no crime to indulge the 
 " appetites of nature. I am charmed with the 
 
 kind free woman, but I honour and revere th.e 
 N 2 *' truly 
 
 (( 
 

<#PG# 278>
26S lie H I S T O R Y of 
 
 *' truly virtuous, and it is a maxim with me never 
 
 •'• to attempt the violation of innocence. Thcfe, 
 
 *' madam, arc my principles in regard to your fcxj 
 
 *' but to convince you further, Here, fel- 
 
 " low,'^ continued he to the coachman, who was 
 walking backwards and forv/ards at fomc diitance, 
 
 • -*' gdt up into your box, and drive where you 
 
 «' were lirft diredled." 
 
 Mifs Betfy acknowledged th.e generofity of this 
 behaviour, and, on his afl^ing by what accident it 
 had happened, that he found her in company with 
 a woman of Mils P^orward's characSler, (he told 
 him ingenuoufl; the truth, " ■ that they knew each 
 other wlien children in the country ; but that (he 
 had not fcen her more than three times fince their 
 coming to London, and was entirely ignorant of her 
 condufl from that time. 
 
 He then took the liberty of reminding her, that 
 a young lady niore endangered her reputation, by 
 an acquaintance with one woman of ill fame, than 
 bv receiving the vifits of twenty men, though pro- 
 felled libertines. — To which fhe replied, that for the 
 future CvxQ (liould be very careful what company fhe 
 kept, of both fexes. 
 
 This v/as the fum of the converfation, that pafTed 
 between them during their little ftp^^e to Mr. Good- 
 man's, where being fafely arrived, after having fcen 
 her within the doors, hefaluted her with a great deal 
 of refpe<S^, and took his leave. 
 
 CHAP. XXXIV. 
 
 Shews zvhat ejfe^s the tranfaoitons cf the frececVing 
 night kcid on the minds of Mifs Betfy and Mr. 
 Trueworth. 
 
 MR. Goodman and Lady Mellafin were gone 
 to bed when Mifs Bctfv ca.xie home j but 
 
 Mifs 
 

<#PG# 279>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 269 
 
 Mifs Flora fat up for her, in complaifimce as fhe 
 pretended, but in reality to fee who it was came 
 
 home with her. This malicious creature hatl 
 
 been extremely fawning, for feme -days paft, to Mifs 
 Betfy ; but this night was more (o than uIij.j1, doub:- 
 lefs, in the hope of being able to draw fomething 
 out of her, which her cruel wit might turn to her 
 difad vantage; but the other knew too well the difpo- 
 fitions {he had tov/ards her. to communicate any thing 
 to her, which fhe would not wifli iliculd be made 
 public. 
 
 Never did any one pafs a night in greater inquie- 
 tudes, than this young lady fullaineil j and flic fclc 
 them the more terribly, as fnc had no friend, i« 
 whom pride and fhame would fuffer her to impart 
 
 the caufe : flic looked back with horror en tlie 
 
 precipice file had fallen into, and confidcred it as a 
 kind of miracle, that (lie had recovered frt m it un- 
 
 liurt ; (lie could nvX refled on what had pafr».'d, 
 
 that by the kvity of her corduil fhe had been 
 tfiought a common proftitute, had been treated as 
 fuch, and preferved from irrecoverable ruin, by th.e 
 meer mercy of a man, who was a perfect (1 range r 
 to her, without feeling anew that coiifufion, v.hicli 
 the nioft fhocking moments of her diffrefs inflided. 
 The mofi: bitter of her enemies could not have 
 pafTed cenfurcs more fevere than fhe did on herfelf, 
 and in this fit of humiliation, and repentance, would 
 even have afked iMr. Triiewonh pardon for the lit- 
 tle regard file had paid to his advice. 
 
 The agitations of her mind would not fuffcr her 
 to take one moment of repofe for the whole nieht, 
 nor did the morning afi'ord any more tranquillity : 
 — — the dirturbance of her heart fiew up into her 
 head, and occafioned fo violent a pain there, that 
 flie was as unable as unwilling to get out of bed. 
 
 She lay 'till fume hours after the time in which 
 
 they ufually brcakfafted, nor would take any rc- 
 
 ficfament, though the tea was broCght to her bcd- 
 
 N r> fide. 
 

<#PG# 280>
270 The HISTORY of 
 
 fide. Aniongu: the crowd of tormenting ideas, 
 
 the remembrance, tliat ilie owed all the vexation 
 fne laboured under, entirely to the act]ua;ntance (be 
 had with Mifs Forward, came ftrong into her 
 .thoughts, and fhe had oot rofe the whole day, if 
 not moved to it by the impatience of venting her 
 fplcen on that unfortunate woman, which (he did, 
 in a letter to her containing thefe lines : 
 
 To Mifs Forward. 
 
 * T AM forry that the ccmpalTion, which your 
 ' -«- feigned contrition for one falfe frep obliged me 
 
 * to take in your misfortunes, f]:iould make you 
 *■ imagine I would continue any converfation with 
 
 * you, after knowing you had abandoned yourfelf 
 
 * to a courfe of life, which I bluili to think any of 
 
 * my fex can defcend to brook the thoughts of^ 
 
 * much more to be guilty of. ——If you had re- 
 ' tained the lead: fpark of generofity, or good-will 
 
 * towards me, you would rather have avoided than 
 coveted my company, as you muft be fenfibie 
 that to be feen with you muft render me, in fome 
 meafurc, partaker of your infamy, though whol- 
 ly ir;noccnt of your crimes.— — -How bafe, • ■• 
 
 * how cruel is fuch a behaviour, efpccially to one, 
 ' v/ho had a real regard for you, even after you 
 
 ' liad confcfled yourfelf unv/orthy of it ; —but I 
 
 ' have been often told, and now 1 iind the obferva- 
 
 tion j'jfr, that women of your wretched principles 
 being lofl: to all hope of happinefs themfelvcs, take 
 a malicious pleafure in endeavouring to deftroy it 
 m otliers, 
 
 ' But, for heaven's fake, what could induce you 
 to dcfire a continuation of a correfpondence with 
 me ? — —What did you take me for? — Did you 
 imagine me fo blind, as not to fee into the {hame- 
 ful means by which you are fupportcd. or fa 
 ^ weak as to forfeit all the reputation and refpedt I 
 
 ' have 
 

<#PG# 281>
iT///SBETSV THOUGHTLrfi:. 27! 
 
 have in the v.'orld, mecrly to comply with your 
 requeft. — No ! — your conckidt is too bartfacecj, 
 to give me even the fliadow of an excufe for evtr 
 feeing you again : do not therefore, ^o about to 
 varniih over actions, whufe fou]i:efs will appear 
 through all the colours you can daub them v.ith. 
 
 Thelrien.lliip I once h.id for you has already 
 
 pleaded all that yourfelf could urge in your de- 
 fence, but the caufe is too bad, and I mull: leave 
 you to the mifcries which attend reniorfe, and 
 
 which a little time will infallibly bri: g on. 
 
 Heavens ! to be a common proflitute ! — To 
 earn precarious bread by being the Have of every 
 
 • man's licentious will. — What is digging in the 
 mines !---\V^hat is begging .'---VVhat is ltar\in„^, 
 when compared to this ?-— But the idea is lovi 
 fiiockingi-'-mouefly fnud jers at it,— I fhall ilrlvfj 
 both that and you as diftant from my thotghrs as 
 pofHblc, fo be aiTured this is the Jaf: lime ycu Vv-ili 
 
 ' ever hear from the 
 
 * Much deceived, 
 * And ill-treated, 
 
 " I). Thoughtless.* 
 
 Sh.e vvasjuft- going to feal up the above letter, 
 when a fudden thought coming into her head, fhe 
 added, to vviiat ilie had already wrote, this pofl- 
 fcript ; 
 
 ' P. S. You may perhaps be inftigatcd to anfwcr 
 ' this, either through refentment for the re- 
 ' proaches it contains, or through f^^mc remains 
 ' of modcfty, to attempt an apology for the oc- 
 ' cafion J but I would not wifli you Oiould give 
 ' yourfelfthat trouble, for beafTured I fliall read 
 ' nothing that comes from you, and that what- 
 < ever you fend, v/ill be returned to you again 
 * unopened.' 
 
 N 4 Sh€ 
 

<#PG# 282>
272 rie H I S T O R Y (;/ 
 
 She Immediately fent this away by a porter, and 
 having fatisfied the didUtes of her indignation a- 
 gainlt Mifs Forward, fne had now done with her, 
 and refolvcd to think of her no more ; — yet was 
 theconfufion of her mind far from being dilUpatcd. 
 — " What will Mr. Trueworth fay,'"' cried fhc to 
 herfflf, " if ever the ridiculous adventure of laft 
 " night fliould reach his ears, as nothing is more 
 '* probable, than that it may ?— - What will my 
 " brother Frank fay, on hearing fuch a ftory ?— 
 " W^hat Mr. Goodman and lady A^ellalln fay?- — 
 *' What a triumph for the envious Mifs Plora ? — 
 ■*' And what can I anfwer for myfelf, either to my 
 •' friends, or enemies ?'^ 
 
 Little care as this young lady had fcemed to have 
 taken of her reputation, it was notwithdanding very 
 dear to her. ---Honour was yet ftill more dear, and 
 (he could not refiecfl:, that what fhe had done might 
 call the one in quefrion, and how near (he had 
 been to having the other irrecoverably loft, without 
 feeling the mod bitter agonies ; (lie was not able 
 to drcfs^, or to go down frairs that day, and gave or- 
 ders to be denied to whoever fliould come to viiit 
 Lcr. 
 
 Va this perplexed fituation of mind let us leave 
 her for a while, and fee with v/hat fort of temper 
 Mr. True^vorth behaved, after luvlng fcen her go 
 ;.o the very woman he had fo much coijured her to 
 avoid. 
 
 Ail the love he had for her, ^would not keep him 
 from rcfcnting this laft rebuff; — he thought he had 
 i:c>tdeferved fuch ufage, nor that his having profef- 
 fcd himftif her lover, gave her the privilege of 
 treating him as her flave :---the humour he was in 
 makir.g him unftt for company, he went diredly to 
 I/is lodgings ; but had not been long there before it 
 came into his head, that poffibly the manner in 
 which file had behaved was only a fit of contra- 
 
 dldioH 
 

<#PG# 283>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 27.^ 
 diction, and, that after all, (he might, when iQic ' 
 was out of hearing, have given counter orders- to 
 the chairmen, and v/as neititer gone to Mifs For- 
 ward's, nor would accompany her to the play.--- 
 With fuch vain imaginations does love fometimes 
 flatter itij votaries, and the finccre and ardent flame, 
 which filled the heart ot Mr. T'ruev/oi th, made him 
 greedily catch at every fuppofition, in favour of the 
 darling objed^. 
 
 Willing, however, to be more affurcd, he be- 
 thought him of a llratagem, which would either 
 relieve all the doubts remaining in him of her oh- 
 ftinacy, or convince him, they were but too juft : 
 ---he fcnt immediately to his barber for a black 
 perriwig, and muflicd up in a cloak, {o as to ren- 
 der italmod an impoiiibility for him to bcknc^wn by 
 any one, went to the theatre, and with a heart di- 
 vided betwixt hope and fear, placed himfelf in a part 
 of the middle gallery, which h^d the full comi^iand 
 of more than half the boxes ;- — he faw a very bril- 
 liant circle, but not (he whom he (o much dreaded 
 to find ftine among them. 
 
 Having fcrutinouHy e.\:.mined all within the 
 reach of his view, he quilted his prcfcnt pod:, and 
 removed to the other fide of the hcufe, where he 
 foon difcovered the perfons became in fearch of :--- 
 he faw Mifs Forward earned in difcourfe with a 
 gentleman that fat behind her^and Mifs Betfy receiv- 
 ing fruit from another, with the fame frcedctn and 
 jTuiety of deportment ilie could have dore, if pre- 
 fentcd by, himfelf •,— he faw the nods,-- the wink?, 
 ---and the grimaces, which fevcral in the pif made 
 to eacii other, when lot^king towards thefe two la- 
 dies, -t every mr-mc.p.t brought with it fomc frefh 
 matter for his mortiScation, yet would net his cu- 
 
 liofity flon here. Wjien the play was erded, he 
 
 went hadJly down ftairs, and mingled with tht 
 crowd tiiai ilood abQu.t th. duor, in hope cf fccin-^^ 
 

<#PG# 284>
274 ^>^^ H I S T O R Y cf 
 Mifs Betfy quit her company, take a cHaIi', and go 
 hoine ;— — but how cruel a (tab was it lo a man, 
 who loved as he did, to find her go with hxCrdiflb- 
 lute companion, and tv/o gentlemen, who, he had 
 reafon to believe, by the little he faw cf their beha- 
 viour, were utter ftrangers to her, into a hackney 
 
 coach ; he was once about to appear himfelt' 
 
 through his difguife, and tell Mifs Betfy, that he 
 thought he had more right to the honour of con- 
 ducting her, than thofe to v/hom fliegavepermifli- 
 on ; but the greatnefs of his fJ3irit aiTifted his pru- 
 dence, in reftraining him from fo rafh an aftion. 
 After this fight, it is not in the power of words to 
 reprefent what it was he iQ]t. Reafon was too 
 weak to combat againft the force of fijch various 
 emotions, as for a time had the entire pofleflion of 
 his foul ;— -he thought Mifs Betfy unworthy of his 
 iove, yet ilill he loved her, and had (lie been wit- 
 nefs of his prefent diflraded ftate, (he would have 
 feen the power fhc had over him, no lefs manifeft 
 in the moments of his rage, than in ihofe in which 
 he had behaved with the greateft tendernefs and 
 rel]3ca. 
 
 His good fenfe, hov/ever, at lafi: convinced him, 
 that as no folid happinefs could be expedcd with a 
 Vv'oman of Mils Betfy*s temper, he ought to con- 
 quer his p:.flion for h€r.---This he refolved to at- 
 tempt, yet thought before he did fo, it would be- 
 come him £0 fee her once more,- --to argue gently 
 with her, and try, at leal^-, if there v/ere not apot- 
 iibility of making her fee the errors fhe was guilty 
 of 
 
 With this intent he went the next day lo vifit 
 her, but being told {he could fee no company that 
 day, v/as going from the door, wheu Mifs Flora, 
 who had watched for him at the i.-ai]ourwindow, 
 came and defired him to walk in ; --his complai- 
 fiiice would not permit him to refufe her requeft, 
 
 and 
 

<#PG# 285>
M'tfs Betsy Thoughtless. 275 
 
 2nd after the ufual compliments, faid, he was forry 
 
 Mifs Betfy was fo ill. " You need not be in 
 
 '* much pain," replied ChQ^ with a look v/hich he 
 thought had more than an ordinary meaning in it, 
 ** {he is not greatly indifpofed." ■'* Perhaps," 
 cried Mr. Trueworth, with fome warmth, " fhe 
 *' is only fo to mc," — " I cannot fay any thing to 
 ** that," returned Mifs Flora, " but her orders 
 *' were In general to all that came ; and I believe, 
 
 " indeed, Ihc is not perfectly well, flie came 
 
 " home extremely late laft niglit, and fccrned in a 
 
 ** good deal of diforder." ** Diforder, madam," 
 
 interrupted Mr. Trueworth, impatiently, " for 
 
 *' heaven's fake, on what occafioa ?'' '* I 
 
 ** wiflil could inform you," anfwcied (lie ; " but at 
 ** prcfent I am not favoured v.^ith her confidence, 
 " though (here was a time, when I u-as made par- 
 
 ** taker of her deareft fecrets : 1 wilh thofe fhc 
 
 *' now intruits them with, Uiay be no \th faithful 
 
 '* to her than I have been.'* *' I hope," faid 
 
 he, *' fhe lias none which, to be betrayed in, would 
 
 *' give her pain." With thefc words he rofe up 
 
 to go away. Mifs Plora fain would have per- 
 
 fv/aded him to drink tea ; but he excufcd himfclf, 
 
 faying, he was engaged, that he came only to 
 
 enquire after the health of her fair friend, and could 
 not have liaycd, if fo happy as to have fecn her. 
 Scarce could this paffionate lover contain himfelf, 
 
 'till he got out of the houfe : the manner in 
 
 which Mifs Flora hi^ fpoke of Mifs Bctfy, added 
 frcih fuel to the jealoufies he v/uS befoie poflc/lcd 
 of ; but how great foever his difturbance was, he 
 found on his return heme, fomewhat which made 
 all he had known before fceni ligiit and trifling. 
 
 CMAP. 
 

<#PG# 286>
2-6 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 CHAP. XXXV. 
 
 Contains fame pajjliges^ wh'ich^ Wis probable nvill 
 afford more pa:n than pUafure^ yet are very per^ 
 tinoit to the b'ljiory^ and necejjary to be related, 
 
 "^HOUGH the words which Mifs Flora had let 
 full to Mr. Trueworth, concerning MiTs 
 Betfy, feemcd as if fpoken b*' meer chance, there 
 was couched under them, a dedgnof the moft black 
 and villainous kind, that ever entered the bread of 
 woman, as will prcfently appear to the aftonifliiment 
 of every reader. 
 
 In order to do this, we mufl: relate an incident 
 in Mifs Bctfy's life, not hitherto mentioned, and 
 v/hich happened feme little time before her going 
 to Oxford, with her brother Frank. 
 
 On her firfl coming to town, a woman had been 
 recommended to her for ftarching, and m.aking up 
 
 her fine linen :■ this perfon Ihe had ever fmcc 
 
 employed, and took a great fancy to, as file found 
 
 her honefi:, induftrious, and very obliging. 
 
 Tiu- poor creature was unhappily married, her 
 
 hufband was '2;one from her, and had lifted himfclf 
 
 forafoldiir; being born in a diiiant county, 
 
 ihe had no relations to whom fhe could apply for 
 
 affiftance, was big with child, and had no fup- 
 
 port but the labour of her hands.^ Thefe cala- 
 mitous circtimftances fo much touclied the com- 
 mifVrative nature of Mifs Bctfy, that fhe frequently 
 gave her double the fum flie demaiided for her work, 
 bcfides beftov-ing on her many things file left oft* 
 wearing, which, though trifles in themfelves, were 
 very helpful to a perfon in fuch diftrefs. 
 
 Mifs Mabel, for whom file alfo worked at the 
 (iime time, was no lefs her patronefs, than Mifs 
 }3etry. — ■ — In fire, they v/cre both extremely kind 
 to hcr^ in fo much as made her often cry OMt, in a 
 
 tranfpurt 
 

<#PG# 287>
M'lfs Betsy Thoughtless. 277 
 
 tranfport of gratitude, that thefe two good young 
 ladies were worth to her all the cuftomers (lie had 
 
 bcfides : they continued to prove themfelves {oy 
 
 indeed ; for when her cliiJd was born, which hap- 
 pened to be a girl, they flood god-mothers, and 
 not only gave handfomely themfeivcs, but raifed a 
 contribution among their acquaiiuancc, for the Tup- 
 port of the lying-in woman and her infant ; the 
 former, however, did not long enjoy the blelling 
 
 of two fuch worthy friends, fne died btforc the 
 
 expiration of her month, and the latter beiiig whol- 
 ly dellitute, was about to be thrown upon the pa- 
 
 rifli ; fome well difpvjfed neighbour, who knew 
 
 how kind Mifs Mabel and Mifs Betiy had Deen, 
 came and acquainted them with the melancholy 
 (lory ;— they confuhed togctlicr, and each rcHetSt- 
 ing, that ihc h.d under lukcn the protection of this 
 infant at the font, thought herfclf bound by duty to 
 preferve it from thofe hardfliips wiJi which children 
 
 thus expofcd, are fomciiines treated: they, 
 
 therefore, as they were equally engaged, agreed to 
 'join equally in the maintenr.nce of this innocent 
 forlorn. 
 
 This wa!^ a rare charity Indeed, and ^cw there 
 are, efp^cially at their years, whofb juftly confider 
 the oDligations of a baptifmal covenant. — It was 
 alfo the more to be admired, as neither of them had 
 the incomes of their furtuties in their own hands, 
 the one being under guardianfliip, and the otljer at 
 the allowance of a father, who, though rich, was 
 extremely avaritious. 
 
 As ttiey were therefore obliged to he good ceco- 
 nomillis in this point, and nurfes in the country are 
 to be had at a much cheaper rate than in town, they 
 got a perfon to feek out for one, who would not 
 be unreafonable in her demands, and at the lame 
 time do juftice to her charge. Such a one, ac- 
 cording to the char^der given uf her by neighbours, 
 
 being 
 

<#PG# 288>
27S The HISTORY of 
 being found, the child decently cloathed, was fcnt 
 down to her habitation, which was in a little vil- 
 lage about feventcen nniles from London. For 
 
 the fke of concealing the part Mifs Mabel had in 
 this affair from the knowledge of her father, it was 
 judged proper that Mifs Eetfy fliould feem to take 
 the whole upon herfelf, which Ihe did, and the 
 nurfe's hufband came up every month, and received 
 the money from her hands, as alfo whatever other 
 neceflaries the child wanted. 
 
 WHo would imagine, that fuch a glorious a6t of 
 benevolence (hould ever be made a handle to tra- 
 duce and viliify the author ?---yet what cannot ma- 
 lice, accompanied with cunning, do ?---It can 
 give the faireft virtue the appearance of the fouleft 
 vice, and pervert the juft eftimation of the world 
 into a miflaken fcornand contempt. 
 
 Mifs Flora, after receiving the difappointment, 
 as related in theXXIXth chapterinthis volume, was 
 far from defifting from the wicked defign (he had 
 conceived of putting an end to the intercourfe be- 
 tween Mifs Betfy and Mr. True worth ; — her fer- 
 tile brain prefented her v/ith a thoufand flratagems, 
 which foe rejected, either as they Vvere too weak to 
 acGompliih w'lat {be Vvifhcd, or too liable to difco- 
 very, till at laft (lie hit upon the moft deteftable 
 proje(9- of reprefenting what proceeded from the 
 nobleit propenfity of Mifs Bc-tfy's nature, as the 
 eiFt'(Sl of a criminal compulfion ;— in fine, to make 
 it appear fo feafihlt, as to be believed, that the 
 child who ov/ed l^ali its maintainance to her charity 
 was entirel} kept by herfelf, and the olispring of 
 her own body. 
 
 Having well weighed and deliberated on this mat- 
 ter, it feemed to b.er fuch as Mr. Trueworth^ on 
 tlie mofl ftridl examination, could not difcover the 
 deception of; - ihc:. therefore ref;>lved to purfue it, 
 and accordingly wrote the followij^g letter : 
 
 To 
 

<#PG# 289>
Mifs Betsv Thoughtless. 279 
 
 To Charles Trueworth, Efq; 
 
 ' Sir, 
 
 TH E fi lendfhip I had for fome of your fami- 
 Jy, now deceafed, and the refpcdt due to 
 your own chara(5lcr in particular, obliges me to 
 acquaint you with truths more difagreeable than 
 perhaps you ever yet have heard ;-'-but before I 
 proceed to the (hocking narrative, let me conjure 
 you to believe, that in me your better angel fpeaks, 
 and warns you to avoid that dreadful gulph of 
 evcrlafting mifery, into which you are jufl: ready 
 to be plunged. 
 
 ' I am inTormed, by thofe who are moft verfed 
 in your affairs, and on whofc veracity I may de- 
 pend, that a treaty of marriage is on fcot, and 
 almoft as good as concluded, between you and 
 Mifs Bctfy Thoug;ht]efs.---A young lady, I muft 
 confefs, well defcended,— handfome, and endued 
 with every acconipliihment to attrad the admi- 
 ration of mankind, and if her foul had the leaft 
 conformity with her exterior charms, }ou, doubt- 
 Icfs, might have been one of the moft hnppy and 
 mod envyed men on earth;--- but, fir, this fccming 
 in.iocence is ail a cheat,- - another has been before- 
 hand with you, in the joys you covet ;--~your in- 
 tended bride has been a mother without the pleafure 
 t'f owning hcrfelfas fuch.— Tiie product cf a fliame- 
 ful paflion is (till living, and though (he ufes the 
 greateft caution in this < n-'uir, I have by accident 
 difcovered, is new nurfcd at Denh^m, a fmall 
 village, v/ithin two mxilcs of Uxbridge, by a gar- 
 dener's wife, who is called by the country people 
 
 goody Du(hman. 1 give you this particular 
 
 account, in order that you may make w!'at en- 
 quiry you (hall think proper into a fad;, which I 
 
 am for ry to fay, you will hnd but too real.* 1 
 
 pity from my foul the unfcituriate feduccd ycung 
 
 ' lady. 
 

<#PG# 290>
28o Ihe H I S T O R Y of 
 
 lady,— — flie muft be doubly miferable, if by 
 having lofl her virtue, flie lofcs a hufband fiich as 
 
 ycu j but if after tliis you fliould think fit to 
 
 prufecute your pretenfions, I wifh fhe may endea- 
 
 * vour, by her future condutSf, to atone for the 
 
 ' errors of the paft ; butalas ! herprefcnt man- 
 
 ' ner of behaviour, affords no fuch promifing ex- 
 ' pe^^ations ; and if you fliculd fet your honour 
 
 * and fortune, and all that is dear to yo ■, againft 
 ' fo precarious a fiakc, as the hope of reclaiming'^ 
 
 * u'oman of her temper, it muft certainly fill all 
 ' your friends with aftonilhment and grief 3' 
 
 but you are yourfelf the befi judge of what it v/ill 
 
 ' become you to do, -I only beg, that you will 
 
 * he afllired this intelligence comes from one, vslio 
 ' is, 
 
 « With the utmoft finccrity, 
 « Sir, 
 * Your well-wifner, 
 ' And moft humble, 
 
 * Thoueh ui, known, fervant." 
 She would not trufl: the fuccefs of the mifchicf 
 {he intended by this letter, 'till (lie had examined 
 and re-examined every fentence, and finding it al- 
 together fucb'as.flie thought would work the defir- 
 ed efftcf, got one, who was always her ready 
 agent, in matters of this kind, to copy it over, in 
 order to prevent any accident from dilcovering tiie 
 real author, and then fent it as directed by the pen- 
 ny-pof}-. 
 
 Hovv' far the event anrwrrcd her expeclations fliiill 
 very {liortly hz related, but incidents of another 
 nature, requiring to he firft mentioned, the gr,atifi- 
 catlon of that curiofity, which this may have ex- 
 ciied, muft for a while be deferred. 
 

<#PG# 291>
M'lfs Betsy Thoughtless. z8i 
 
 c H A P. xxxvr. 
 
 Is the recital cf fome accidentia as little fcjfihle to 
 be forefgen by the reader^ as they were by the 
 perfons to whom they happened. 
 
 IN youth, when the blood runs high, and the fpi- 
 lits are in full vivacity, afflifticn muft come 
 very heavy indeed, when it makes any deep or 
 laliing iniprciiion on the mind.- That vexation 
 v/hich Mifs Bctfy had brought upon herfelf, by go- 
 ing to the play with Mils Forward, was fevere 
 
 enough the wljolc night, and the enfuing day. 
 
 A great wliilc, it muft be confefTcd, for a perfoii 
 of her volatile difpofition, and when th.e more vio- 
 lent emotions had fubfided, the terror flie had lately 
 fuilained, had, at leaft, this good efFe6l upon her, 
 it made her refolve to take cill pciTible prccai.ticns 
 
 not to full into the like danger again. As {lie 
 
 had an infinite deal of generofity in her nature, 
 when not cbfcurcd by that pride and vanity which 
 the batteries file had been but too much accunomed 
 to, had infpircd her with, flie could not reflccfl how 
 ill fhe had treated Mr. Trueworth, and the little 
 regard (he had paid to the tender concern he had 
 fhewn for her reputation, without thinking Die 
 ought to afk liis pardon, and acknowlccigc flie had 
 
 been m the wrong. If Mr. Trueworth could 
 
 have known the humour flie was at prcfent in, 
 how readily would he have flown to her with all 
 the wings of love and kind forgivencfs j but as he had 
 not the fpirit of divination, and could only judge of 
 her fentiments by her behaviour, it was not in his 
 power to conceive how great a change had happen- 
 ed in hi. favour, through a juft fenfibility of her 
 own error. 
 
 She in the mean time, little imagined how far he 
 refented the treatment (he bad given him, efpcci- 
 
 ally 
 

<#PG# 292>
282 neH I S T O R Y of 
 
 ally as fhe heard he had been to wait upon her the 
 day in which flie faw no company, and after hav- 
 ing paft a night of much more tranquillity than the 
 former had been, went down in the morning to 
 
 breakfafl, with her ufual chearfulnefs ; fhe had 
 
 not been many minutes in the parlour, before fhe 
 was agreeably furprizcd Vvith the fight of her elder 
 brother, Mr. Thomas Thoughtlcfs, who, itfeems, 
 had arrived the night before. After the firfl: wel- 
 comes were over, Mr. Guodman afked him, Where- 
 fore he did not come dircdily to his houfe ? faying, 
 he had always a fpare bed to accommodate a friend ; 
 —-To which the other replied, that he had come 
 from Paris with fome company, whom he could 
 not quit, and that they had lain at the Hummums. 
 ---Mils Betfy was extremely ^ranfported at his re- 
 turn, and faid a thoufand obliging things to him, 
 all which lie anAvcred with more pulitenefs than 
 tenderncfs, and this young l^dy foon perceived by 
 this rpccimen of his carria^;^ to her, that (he was 
 not to expedl the fame aflecticn from him, as fhe 
 had received (o many proofs of from her younger 
 brother. 
 
 His long abfence from England, and fome at- 
 tachments he had found abroad, had, indeed, very 
 much taken ofF that v/armth of kindnefs he would, 
 doubtlefs, otherwife have felt for an only fifter, and 
 one who appeared (o worthy of his love.-— As Mr. 
 Goodman had acquainted him by letter, that he 
 had hired a houfe for him, according to his rcqueft, 
 the chief of their converfation turned on that fub- 
 je(^, and as foon as breakfaft was over, they took 
 a walk together to fee it :— on their return he 
 feemed very much pleafed with the choice Mr. 
 Goodman had made, and the little time he flayed 
 was entirely taken up with confulting lady Mi^ila- 
 fm, his fifter, and Mifs Flora, concerning the 
 manner m which he ihould ornament it j for the 
 
 honeft 
 

<#PG# 293>
ili//i Betsy Thoughtless. 283 
 
 honeft guardian had taken care to provide all fuch 
 furniture, as he thought would bo ncctflary for a 
 fingle gentleman. 
 
 No intreaties were wanting to prevail on him, 
 to make that houfe his home, till his own was tho- 
 roughly aired, ana in all refpedis fit for him to go 
 into; but he cxcufed himfelf, faying, he could not 
 leave the friends he had travelled with, till they were 
 provided for as well as himfelf, nor could all Mr. 
 Goodman, and the ladies urge, perfuade him to 
 dine with them that day. 
 
 It muft be acknowledged, thr.t this pofiti'-c refa- 
 fal of every thing that was defired of him, had not 
 in it all that complaifancc, which might have been 
 expected from a perfon juft come from among a 
 people more famous for their politenefs, than their 
 fmccrity. 
 
 But he had his own reafons, which the f<^mily of 
 Mr. Goodman as yet were far from fufpcding, 
 which made him a6t in the manner he now did, and 
 it was not, in reality, the want of French breed- 
 ing, but the want of true old Engiilh refolution, 
 that enforced this feeming negligence and abrupt- 
 ncfs. 
 
 After he was gone, Mr. Goodman went to 
 'Change, but was fcarce entered into the walk, 
 where he had appointed to meet fome merchants, 
 when he was accoftcd by two rough ill-looked fel- 
 lows, who demanded his fword, and told him, 
 
 they had a writ againft him, that he was their 
 
 prifoner, and muft go with them. 
 
 Mr. Goodman, who had as little reafon as any 
 man living to fufpedl an infult of this nature, only 
 fmiled, and told them, they were miflaken in the 
 
 perfon. " No, no," faid one of them, " we 
 
 " are right enough, if you are Mr. Samuel Good- 
 
 ■*' man." ** My name is Samuel Goodman,'* 
 
 replied he^ '* but 1 do not know that it ftands in 
 
 *' any 
 

<#PG# 294>
284 ne H I S TO R Y of 
 
 " any man's books for debt ;— but pray," con- 
 tinued he, 'Sat vvhofo fuit am I arrelted ?'' 
 
 " At the fuit of Mr. Oliver Marplus," faid the 
 
 other officer. '•' I have no dealings with any 
 
 *' fuch perfon," cried Mr. Goodman, " nor even 
 " ever heard the name of him you mention.'* 
 They then told him, it was his bufincfs to prove 
 
 that, they did but do tlieir duty, and he muft 
 
 obey the writ.— -Mr. Goodman on this, know- 
 ing they were not the pcrfons with whom this mat- 
 ter fhould be conteded, readily went where they 
 .conda<Sted him, whi^h was to a houfe belongino; 
 to him who appeared to be principal of the two.— 
 As they were coming off 'Change, he bad his 
 coachman drive his chariot home, and tell his lady, 
 that he believed he (liould not dine with her that 
 dxy ; but he kept his footman with him, to fend 
 on what mefiages he Ihould ^\n(^ convenient. 
 
 The oilicer, knowing his condition, and not 
 doubting but he fiiould have a handfome prefent for 
 civility- money, ufed him with a great deal of ref- 
 pec>, when he had got him into his houfe ; and, 
 on his defifingto be informed of the lawyer's name, 
 employed in the a6iion, he immediately told him, 
 and alfo for what fum he was arre/led, which was 
 no lefs than two thoufand, five hundred., and feven- 
 
 ty-fie pounds, eight fliillings. -'' A pretty par- 
 
 " eel of money truly," faid Mr. Goodman, " I 
 *' wonder in what dream I contracted this debt " — 
 He then called for pen, ink, and paper, and wrote 
 a line to his lawyer in the Temple, defiring him to 
 go to the other, who, they faid, was concerned 
 againfl: him, and find out the truth of this affair. 
 
 The honeft old gentleman having fent this letter 
 by his fervant, called for fomething to eat, and was 
 extremely facetious and pleafant with the officers, 
 not doubting but that what had happened was occa- 
 fioned through fome miftake or other, and he 
 
 fhould 
 

<#PG# 295>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 285 
 
 fhould immediately be difcharged, when the thing 
 was enquired into; but his prefent good hu- 
 mour was changed into one altogether the reverfe, 
 when his own lawyer, accompanied by him who 
 was engaged for his adverfary, came to him, and 
 told him, there was no remedy but to give bail ; — 
 that the fuit commenced againft him, was on ac- 
 count of a bond given by lady Mcllafin to Mr. Oli- 
 ver Marplus, fome few days previous to her mar- 
 riage.— 'Tis hard to fay, whether furprife or rage 
 was mod predominant in the foul of this much-in- 
 jured hufband, at (o (hocking apiece of intelligence. 
 He demanded to fee the bond, which requeft 
 being granted, he found it, not as he at flrft flat- 
 tered himfcif, a forgery, but figned with his wife's 
 own hand, and witricfled by Mrs. Prinks her w^o- 
 man, and another perfon whom he knew not. 
 It is certain, that no confufion ever exceeded that 
 
 of Mr. Goodman'^s, at this time y he fat like 
 
 one transfixed with thunder, and was wholly inca- 
 pable of uttering one fyllable ; he appeared to 
 
 the company as loft in thought ; but was indeed 
 almoft paft the power of thinking, till his lawyer 
 roufed him with thefe words, — ' — '* Come, Sir," 
 
 faid he, " you fee how the cafe ftands, there 
 
 " is no time to be loft, — you muft either pay the 
 *' mqney down, or get immediate fecurity ; for I 
 " fuppoie you 'vvould not chufe to lie here to- 
 *' night." — This feafonable admonition brought 
 him a little to himfelf : — he now began to reflect 
 what it would beft become him to do, and after a 
 paufe of fome moments, " I believe,'', faid he, 
 " that I have now in my houfe more than the fum 
 *' in bills, that would difcharge this bond, but I 
 " vvould willingly hear what this woman has to 
 *' fay before I pay the money, and will therefore 
 " give in bail." — i\ccordingly he fent for two ci- 
 tizens of great worth and credit, to dcfire them to 
 
 ccme 
 

<#PG# 296>
2U The HIST OR Y cf 
 
 come to him ; — they inftantly complied with this 
 fummons, and the whole affair being repeated to 
 them, voluntarily offered to be his fureties. 
 
 Bail bonds were eaiily procured, but it took up 
 (o much time in filling them up, and difcharging 
 the fees, and other ccnfcquential expences, that 
 it was pad: one o'clock before all was over, and 
 Mr. Goodman had liberty to return to his own 
 habitation. 
 
 It was very feldom that Mr. Goodman ftaycd 
 late abroad ; but whenever any thing happened that 
 obliged him to do fo, lady Meilafm, through the 
 great affection ihe pretended to have for him, 
 would never go to bed till his return. -—Mrs. Prinks 
 for the moft part was her fole companion in fuch 
 cafes ; but it fo fell out, that this night neither of 
 the two young ladies had any inclination to fleep : 
 ---Mifs Flora's head was full of the abovementioned 
 plot, and the anxiety for its fuccefs ;--the remem- 
 brance of the late adventure at Mifs Forv/ard's, 
 was not yet quite diffipated in Mifs Betfy ;---the 
 colunefs with which flie imagined herfclf treated by 
 her elder brother, with whcmfhe had flattered her- 
 felf of living, and being very happy under his pro- 
 tedlion, gave her a good deal of uneafinefb.— To 
 add to all thefe matters of difquiet, fhe had alfo 
 received that afternoon a letter from Mr. Francis 
 Thoughtlefs, acquainting her, that he had had the 
 misfortune to be fo much bruifcd by a fall he got 
 from his horfe, that it was utterly impoffible for 
 him to travel, and flie muff not exp^^d him in town 
 yet for feme days. 
 
 The ladies were all together, fitting in the parlour, 
 each chufing rather to indulge her own private me- 
 ditations, than to hold difcourfe witli the others, 
 when ^/Ir. Goodman came home.— —Lady Mcl- 
 lafm ran to embrace him with a fliew of the great- 
 eft tendcrnefs,"-^' My dear Mr. Goodman," cried 
 
 fhe, 
 

<#PG# 297>
Mifs Betsv Thoughtless. 287 
 
 flic, " how much have 1 TufFered from my fears, 
 •■ leaft fomeil! accident fhould have befallen you !" 
 « .—The worft that could have happened has be- 
 *' fallen me," replied he, thrufting her from him ; 
 *' yet no more than what you ni'ght very reafon- 
 *' ably expert would one day or other happen. "--- 
 ** What do you njcan, my dear," faid fhe, more 
 alarmed at his woidsand locks than fhe made fliew 
 of ?— -" You may too eaftly inform yourfelf what 
 " 'tis I mean," cried he haftily, *' on the retro- 
 *' fpccft of your behaviour.— »— I now find, but too 
 " late, how much I have been impofcd upon. ■ ■ 
 *' Did you not aflure me,'' continued he, fome- 
 what more mildly, '* that you were free from all 
 '* incunioranccs but that girl, whom, fince our 
 " marriage, I have tendered as my own ?" 
 And then pcrceivirig flie anfwered nothing, but 
 looked pale and trembled, he repeated to her the 
 afFr( nt he had received, " which,*' faid he, " in 
 " all my dealings in the world, would never have 
 ^' happened, but on your account." 
 
 Tho .gh lady Mellafm had as much artifice, and 
 the power of dilFimulation, as any of her fex, yet 
 
 {lie was at a lofs-thus taken unprepared. (be he- 
 
 fitateJ, (lie ftammered, and fain would hav-e 
 
 denied the having given any fuch bond ; but finding 
 the proofs too plain againlt her, (he threw herfelf 
 
 at his feet, wept, and conjured him to forgive 
 
 the only deception die had pracStifed on him : — 
 
 *' It was a debt," faid (lie, " contraded by my 
 
 *'• former hulband, which 1 knev*' not of. i 
 
 "" ihouiht the efFeds he left behind him were more 
 *< than fufHcient to have dilchargcd whatever ob- 
 *' ligations he lay under, and fooliflily took cut 
 '' letters of adminiilrrtion. — Tiie demand of Mar- 
 " plus came not upon me till fome time after, — I 
 ''•■ tlien inconfiderately gave him my own bond, 
 
 " which 
 

<#PG# 298>
2S8 ne H I S TO R Y (?/ • 
 
 '' which he however promlfed not to piit in force 
 *' without previoufly acquainting me.'*- 
 
 This excufe was too weak, as well as all the af- 
 fection Mr. Goodman had for her, to pacify the 
 emotions of his juft indignation, — " And pray," 
 cried he, in a voice divided between fcorn and an- 
 ger, *' of what advantage would it have been to 
 *' me your being previoufly acquainted with it ?— 
 " Could you have paid the money without rob- 
 " bing, or defrauding me ? — No, madam,'' con- 
 tinued he, " I fhall for the future give credit to 
 *' nothing you can fay, and as I cannot be ailiired 
 *' that this is the only misfortune I have to dread 
 *' on your account, fliall confider what ftepa I 
 '' ought to take for my defence." 
 
 In fpeaking thefe words he rung the bell for a 
 fervant, and ordered that bed, to which he had in- 
 vited Mr. Thoughtlefs, fhould that inibnt be made 
 ready for himfeif.-— All the tears and intreaties of 
 lady Mellafin were in vain, to make him recede 
 from his refolution of lying alone that night ; and 
 as foon as he was told his orders were obeyed, he 
 flung out of the room, fiying,-— " Madam, per- 
 *' haps, we never more may meet between a pair 
 *' of fheets."-.- Whether at that time he was de- 
 termined to carry his refentment fo far, or not, is 
 uncertain, but wha»' happened very fhortly after, 
 left him no other part to take, than that which he 
 had threatened. 
 
 C H A P. XXXVII. 
 
 Clves a full explanation of fome faffages^ ivhich 
 hitherto have feemecl very dark and myfterious, 
 
 THIS was a night of great confufion in Mr.' 
 Goodman's Ifamily :--.]ady Mellafm either 
 was, or pretended to be, in fits;---Mir3 Flora was 
 
 called 
 

<#PG# 299>
Mifs Bet^y Thoughtless. 2^9 
 
 called up foon after fhe went to bed, but Mr. 
 Goodman himfelf would not be prevailed upon to 
 rife, though tolJ the condition his wife was in, and 
 that (lie begged with the utmoft earnclbefs to fej 
 him. 
 
 This behaviour in a husband lately fo tender and 
 afrecH:>nate, is a proof, not only that the greatcft 
 love once turned degenerates into its reverie, but 
 alfo that the fweeteft tempci-, when too much pro^ 
 voked by injuries, is not always the moll eafy to 
 be reconciled.- --The perfect truft he had put in 
 lady i\Iel]aiin,---the implicit faith he had given to 
 all (he laid, -.-and the dependance he had on the 
 love fhe had proftHcd for him, made the decep- 
 tion (he was now convifled of appear in worfe co- 
 lours, than otherwife it would liave done. 
 
 The more he reflefled on this ugly affair, the 
 more he was convinced of the hypocrify of his 
 
 wife, in w; om he had placed fuch confidence 
 
 ** We have been married near five years," fiid he, 
 tohimf:if; '^ hnv comes it to pafs, that the pe- 
 ** nalty of this bond was not in fo long a time dc- 
 ** manded f---It mull be that Ihe has kepi it cfFby 
 '* large intcreft, and torbearance-money, and who 
 *' knows how f:ir my credit may be endaru^rered 
 '* for the raifing of it ? 'Tis likely, that while I 
 *' thought every thing necelTary for my family 
 *^ was pu'chafcd with ready m-ney, I may fiand 
 " indebted to all the tradefmen this v/icked woman 
 
 ' has had any dealings with ; nay, I cannot e- 
 
 ** ven all'ure my felf, that other obligations of the 
 *' fame kind with this I have already fuffered for, 
 " may not, fume time or other call upon me for 
 " their difcharge." 
 
 With thtfc diffcurbed meditations, inftead of fleep, 
 did lie pafs what was remaiiiingof tiie night; when 
 he went to bed j vet he arofe the next day full as. 
 
 Vol. I. ' O eiirlr 
 

<#PG# 300>
200 rhe H rs TO R Y of 
 
 early as he was accuftomed to do, after having en- 
 joyed the beft rcpofe. 
 
 The firft thing he did was to fend for as many of 
 thofe trades -people, as he either knew himfelf, or 
 Lis fervants could inform him, had at any time fent 
 
 goods into his houfe. On their prefenting them- 
 
 firlves before him, he found, more to his vexation 
 than furprife, for he now expcdlcd the worft, that 
 all of them, even to thofe who fupplied his kitchen, 
 
 had bills of a long flanding : he difcharged all 
 
 their feveral demands direcily, and having taken a 
 receipt in full from each of them, defired they 
 would henceforward fuffer no goods to be left with- 
 in his doors without the value being paid on the de- 
 livery. 
 
 Mr. Goodm.an had juft difpatched the laft of 
 thefe people, when he was told a woman begged 
 
 leave to fpcak to him : *' Another creditor, I 
 
 •• fuppofe," fa'd he, and then ordered (he (hould 
 
 come in. As foon as {he did fo, *' Well, 
 
 ** miftrcfs," cried he, feeing her a woman of a very 
 
 plain appearance,- *' what is it you require of 
 
 ** nie r" — — *' Nothing, Sir," replied (he, " but 
 *' that -you will permit me to acquaint you with ii 
 ** thi^^g, which it very much concerns you to be 
 
 «* informed of?" *' I fhould otherwifc be an' 
 
 *' enemy to myfelf," refumed he, " therefore 
 *' pray fpeak what you have to fay •'* 
 
 * I «im, Sir,' faid (lie, ' the unfortunate wife 
 
 * of one of the moft wicked men upon earth, and 
 
 * by my being fo have been compelled to be in 
 ^ fomc meafure acceflary to the injultice you have 
 
 * fuftalncd i but I hope what I have to reveal will 
 
 * atone for my tranfgrcffion.' Mr. Good- 
 
 * man then defiring flie would fit down, and with- 
 out any farther prelude proceed to the bufmefs fhe 
 came upon. 
 
 * The fum nf what I have to relate,' rejoined 
 
 (he, 
 

<#PG# 301>
A///} Betsy Thoughtless. 291 
 fhe, * is, that the bond, on which you were yefter- 
 ' (Jay arreted, and for the payment of which you 
 
 * have given fccurity, is no more than an impudent 
 
 * fraud ; but the particulars, that prove it fuch, 
 
 * cannot but be very difplcafuig to you ; however 
 
 * I (hall make no apology for relating them, as 
 
 * the pcrfcd knowledge of the whole tranfacliori 
 ' may put you in a way to prevent all future inju- 
 ' ries of the like nature. 
 
 ' My hufband, whofe name is Oliver Marplus,* 
 cont nued flie, ' had the honour of waiting on a 
 
 * nobleman belonging to court, when Sir Simon 
 
 * Mellafm had a poii: there : his lady, now un-. 
 
 * happiiy yours, took a fancy to him, and enter- 
 ' ed into a criminal converfation with him, fome 
 ' time before her husband's death, and has ever 
 ' fmce, unlcfs very lately broke off, continued it. 
 
 * On my flrf!: difcovering it, he begged me to be 
 ' eafy, and reminded me, that as he had nothing 
 
 * at prefent to depend upon, having loft his place, 
 ' but her ladi {hip's bounty, I ought to wink at it, 
 
 * and be content that fnc (hould fhare his perfon, 
 
 * fmce I fhare in the benefits arifmg from their 
 
 * intercourfe. I knov/ing his temper too well, 
 ' not to know that any oppofition 1 could make 
 
 * would be in vain, and feeing no other remedy, 
 
 * was obliged to feign a confent to what the love I 
 
 * then had for him rendered moft terrible to me--- 
 
 * Thus we went on, her ladyfliip dill fupplying, 
 
 * him with money for our fuppori, till he being in- 
 
 * formed, that her marriage v.ith you was near be- 
 
 * ing confummated, he bethought himfelf of a flra- 
 
 * tagem to prevent the change of her condition from 
 
 * depriving him of the continuance of her favour, 
 ' — It was this : 
 
 ' Tiieir private meetings were always in the Sa- 
 \ voy, at a houfc of my hufband's chufing for that 
 
 * purpufe, the mafter of it being his intimate friend 
 
 O 2 ' an(i 
 

<#PG# 302>
Q.Q1 The H I S T OR Y of 
 
 ' and compairion. ---Myfclf, and two men, whom 
 ' he made pi ivy to the plot, and were to perfonate 
 
 * officers of juilice, were to he concealed in the 
 *■ next room to the lovers, and as foon as we 
 ' found they were in bed, burft open the door, 
 
 * rufh in, and catch them in the very a6t of 
 
 * fhamc. 
 
 ' All this was executed according as it was cori' 
 
 * triveid i my hufband jumped out of bed, pre- 
 
 *. tended to ftruggle with the (liam conftables, and 
 
 * fvvore he v/ould murder me.--- 1 acfed my part, as 
 ' they fince told me, to the life, Teemed a very 
 
 * fury, and faid 1 did not care what became of me, 
 
 * if I was but revenged upon my rival. — Lady 
 
 * Mcllafin tore her hair, wept, and intreated me 
 
 * in the moft abjed terms to forgive, and nat 
 
 * expofe a woman of her rank to public fcorn 
 
 * and infamy.- --To wliich I replied, that it was 
 *■ not her quality fliould prote«5t her : — I loaded her 
 ' with the moft inveterate reproaches I could think 
 
 * of. - indeed, there required not much ftudy for 
 
 * niv doing fo, for I heartily hated her.— -After 
 « fome time pafied in befeechings on her fide, and 
 ' railings on mine, one of the pretended conftables 
 ' took me afide, as if to pcrfuade me to more mo- 
 ' deration, while the other talked to her, and in- 
 
 * finuated as if a fum of money might con^promifc 
 
 * the matter.--- My hufband alfo told her, that 
 ' though he detefted me for what I had done, yet 
 
 * he wifhed her ladylliip, for her own fake, would 
 
 * think of fome way to pacify me ;-— for, faid he, 
 
 * a wife in thefe cafes has great power.' 
 
 * The terror fhe was in of appearing before a ci- 
 
 * vil magidrate, and of being liable to fufTcr that 
 
 * punifliment the law inflicts upon an adukrefs, 
 *• and confequently the lofs of all her hopes of a 
 *• marriage with you. Sir, made her readily agree 
 '• to do any thing I fliould require.-- 1 feen)ed quite 
 
 * averfe 
 

<#PG# 303>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 293 
 
 * averfe for a good while to liftcn to any terms of 
 accommodation, but at length afFc6ted to be o- 
 vercome by the perfuafions of the men I brought 
 with me, and her promifc of allowing us a very 
 handfome fupport, as foon as (he became your 
 wife, and fhould have it in her power.- --This 
 
 ' I made flight on, and told her, that I would not 
 depend upon hir promife for any thing.-— It was 
 
 * then propofed, that fhc fhould give a bond for 
 a large fum of money to Mr. Marplus.---' That 
 you may do with Lfety,* faid he to her, ' as I 
 fliall jjave it in my own hands, and you may be 
 afTurcd will never put it in force to your preju- 
 dice.' 
 
 ' In fine, Sir, continued Mrs. Marplus, fae a- 
 greed to tiiis prrpofal, and as it Vv'as then too late 
 for the extcution of what file had promiftd, on 
 her making a folcmn vow to fulfil it pnr6iua]]y 
 
 * the next day, I told her, fhc was at liberty to go 
 home that night, but that I would nut withdiitu' 
 the warrant I pretended to have taken gut a^iiiiH\ 
 
 * her, till ail was over. 
 *■ She was, indeed, too moch rejoiced at the ex- 
 
 pe(£lation of getting ofr from the imaginary pro- 
 fecution to think of breaking her word ; — my 
 wicked hulbacid, however, had the fuccefs of iiis 
 defign more greatly at heart, than to give her any 
 long time for reflection, : accordingly we went 
 pretty early the next morning to her lodgings, ac- 
 companied by one of thofe, who had aifumcd 
 the character of conftable, and v/ho, in reality, 
 had formerly ferved the parifli where he ftill lives 
 In that capacity, and a lawyer, previoully direft- 
 ed to fill up the bond in the ftrongcft and moft 
 binding terms that words could form.. Thero 
 was not the leaft demur or objection, on the part 
 of iier ladyfliip ;— fhe Cgned her name, and Mrs. 
 O 3 Prinks, 
 

<#PG# 304>
294 "^'he H I S T O R Y f/ 
 
 Prinks, her woman, and the man we brought 
 with us, fet their h.nds as witnefies. 
 ' You fee, Sir,' purfued fne, ' tiie drift of this 
 contrivance, lady Mellafin was the inflrument, 
 but it was you that was brdaintd to fuficr : — ^ — 
 there was no fixed fum, or fums, llifulated fcr 
 the fupport we were to received from her ; but 
 Marplus was fo continually dr ining her purfe, 
 that I have often been amazed by v^hat arts fbe 
 
 impofed on you to replenifli it. Whenever 
 
 fhe began to make any excufe for not complying 
 with his ciemands, he prefently threatened her 
 with putting the bond in force againfi: you> by 
 v.'hich means he extorted from her almoll: v*'hut- 
 ever he required.' 
 
 ' One time in particular, he pretended to be un- 
 der an.arreft for three hundred pounds, and flie 
 not having fo much money by her, was obliged 
 to fend Mrs. Prinks, with her diamond necklace, 
 
 to the pawn broker's to make it up ; yet, — 
 
 would you believe it, Sir ? — notwithfiandrng all 
 he g.'.t fr.-.ni her kdyfliip, he kept me poor and 
 mean, as you fee; — would not let me have a 
 fcrvant, but made me wafh his linnen, and do all 
 the drudgery, while he ftruted about the town, 
 like a fine fellow, with his tupee wig, and laced 
 waificoat, and if I made the leaft complaint, 
 would tell me in derifion, that as I had no chil- 
 dren I had nothing elfe to do but to v/ait upon 
 him.— I bore all this, however, bccaufe I loved 
 the villain, and, indeed, did not then knovy he 
 was fo great a one to me, as I now find he is. 
 ' He pretended to me, that he was heartily 
 weary of lady. Mellafin,— hated her, — and could 
 no longer bear the pain of difiembling with her, 
 
 -' f will, therefore,' faid he, ' demarid a 
 
 much larger fum of her, than 1 knov/ it is in 
 h€r power to raife i— her noncompliance will 
 
 «' giyc 
 

<#PG# 305>
M//} Betsy Thoughtless. 295 
 *' give me an excufe for compelling her hufband to 
 *' pay the penalty of the bond, and when I have 
 ' got the money I will purchafe an employment 
 *' in fome one or other of the public offices, on 
 *' which you and I may live comfortably together 
 *' the remainder of our days.' 
 
 ' According]}-, at his next meeting with lady 
 ' Mtllalin, he told her, he had a prefent occafioii 
 ' for a fum of money, and {he muil: Lt him have 
 ' five hundred pounds, within four or five days 
 ' at fartheft.- --This, it feems, extremely alarmed 
 ' her ; (he replied, that it was impcfnbie for i^er 
 
 * to procure fo much at once, — comi laincd that 
 
 * he had been too prcfnn[r upon her, and tcjlii him, 
 ' that hcougiit not to expert (he con^d always fup- 
 
 * ply his extravagancies in the manner (he had Lte- 
 .' ly done. — High words arofe between th'i'Ti on 
 ,* this accoui't ; --{lie reproaclied him with the 
 *,flraits he had already rut her to, — faid he mufl 
 ' wait till money came into her hands. — He fwc-rc 
 ' the prefent exigence of his atfairs required an im- 
 ' mediate fupply, — that he faw no remedy but at- 
 
 * refiing you, and they parted in great ar.ger. 
 
 ' The next day he fcnt me to her with a letter ; 
 ' — neither fhe, nor Mrs. Prinks, was at home, 
 
 * ajid I di^l not judge proper to leave it with ti.e 
 ' fervants, fo carried it back again .• -—he did rot 
 ' happen to alk me for it, and I never thou?/-.! of 
 
 * returning it, wMch I am now very glad of, as it 
 
 * may ferve to coiroborate the truth of what I 
 ' told you.' 
 
 In fpeaking this, fhe prefented a paper to Mr, 
 Goodman, v/lnch he took hafiily out of her hand?, 
 and found it contained thefe words : 
 To lady Mellasin. 
 ' Madarn^ 
 ' 'V7' OUR excufes won't do with me,. .-Money 
 ' A I mufi: have J--I know you may raife it if 
 O 4 ' yc'j 
 

<#PG# 306>
igG The Ul ST OR Y of 
 
 you will, and I am amazed you fhould imagine 
 I can believe any thing you iay to the contrary, 
 when you have an old fellow, who, you your- 
 felf told me, knows no end to his wealth, and 
 that you married him only to make him my bank- 
 er.---Do not, therefore, offer to trifle with me 
 any longer, for if you do, by my foul I fiiall 
 put the bond in force, and then there will be an 
 end of all love and all friendfliip between you and 
 him, who has been for fo many years, 
 ' Your conftant fervant, 
 
 ' O. Marplus.' 
 
 " Oh ! wretched,— -wretched woman !" cried 
 Mr. Goodman, as foon as he had done reading, 
 -►-" to how low, —how contemptible a frate has 
 ** vic.e reduced her!"-— Mrs. Marplus, perceiving 
 by his countenance the diftiadtion of his mind, 
 would not profecute her difcourfe, till he, re- 
 covering himfelf a little, bid her go on, if any 
 thing yet remained to be related of this ilhocking 
 narrative. 
 
 ' I have told you. Sir,' refumed ihe, the pre- 
 * parations, the ccr.fcquence you are but too well 
 
 acquainttd with.— I have only to aflure you, that 
 1 had not difcovered my hulband's bafcnefs, but 
 with a view of your doing yourfelf juliice ;— - 
 you have no occation to pay this bond,-— you can 
 prove it a fraud by the joint evidence of myfelf 
 his wile, and another pcrfon, no kfs deeply con- 
 * cerncd in the contrivance, and is ready to make 
 
 < his affidavit of every particular I have recited ;- — 
 ' but then whatfocver is done, mufl be done with 
 « expedition, or he will be paft the reach, either of 
 « vou or me.--.-I have juft now learned, that inftead 
 
 < of purchafing an employment, as lie pretended 
 
 < to me, he is privately prq)aring to go over to 
 HoJlaijd, Bxuflels, or ibmc of thofe places, and 
 
 fettle 
 

<#PG# 307>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 297 
 
 ' fetde there with a young hufley, who, they fay, 
 
 * is with child by him, and will leave me here to 
 
 * ftarve. His lawyer, to whom he has afligned 
 
 * the :bond, is to advance fifteen hundred peunds 
 
 * upon if, on condiiicn he has the refidue of it to 
 ' himlllf, when you (hall difcharge the whole. 
 ' Now it is in your power. Sir, to fave yourfell- 
 
 * the payment of fo much money, and relieve a 
 ' much injured and dirtreffcd wife, by complaining 
 ' to the court of Chancery of the impofition prac- 
 ' ticed on you, and procure a Ne exeat regnum io 
 
 * prevent his efcape.' 
 
 Here (he gave over fpcaking, and Mr. Goodman 
 after a fliort paiife, replied, that he could not £t 
 that inftant refol.ve on any thing j but added, that he 
 would take fomc advice, and then let her know how 
 (-.IT (he might be ferviceablc to him : --on which flie 
 took her leave, after giving him direiSlions wJ^cre (lie 
 mi'jht be found. 
 
 CHAP. XXXVIII. 
 
 Shews fome part cf the confequenct^^ produced hy the 
 foregoing occurrence, 
 
 THOUGH Mr. Goodman very eafiiy perceiv- 
 ed the wife of Marplus had not made the 
 difcovery fhe had done through any principle of 
 confcience, or true contrition for having been an 
 accomplice in the bafe atfion (he had revealed, but 
 mecrly in revenge to a hufband, who had ufcd her 
 ill, and v/as about to leave her, yet he thought it 
 behoved him to draw all the advantages he could, 
 from the knowledge of fo aftonifhing, and \'o alarm- 
 ing a fecret. 
 
 He therefore wafled no time, either in unavail- 
 ing reflections on his own inconfiderarenefi in mar- 
 rying at his years, a woman, fuch as W\y Mellafin, 
 U 5 nor 
 

<#PG# 308>
29S ne HISTORY of 
 
 nor in exclamations on her ingratitude and perfidf- 
 oufnefs, but convinced bc)ond a doubt of the 
 wrongs he had fuftained, bent his whole mind on 
 doing himfelf juflice, in as ample a m^anner as pof- 
 fible, on the aggreflbrs. 
 
 The lawyer, to whom he had applied the day 
 before, was not only a pcrfon who had tranfa(5icd 
 all the bufinefs he had in his way, but was alfo hrs 
 acquaintance of a long Handing, and very good 
 friend, and it was no inconfidcrable coniolation, 
 under fo grievous a misfortune, that he was not 
 at a 'ofs whom he fliOuld confult on an aft'.iir 
 that lequired the greateft integrity, as well as abi- 
 lity. 
 
 The gentleman, luckily for Mr. Goodman's im- 
 patience, came to enquire how he did, after his lafl 
 night's Ihock, juft as he was preparing to wait on 
 him, in order to acquaint him with the more (tab- 
 bing cne he had fmce received : this injuied hus- 
 band rejoiced, as much as the prefent unhappy fi- 
 tuation of his mind would permit, at the fight of his 
 fiiend, and related to him, in as brief a manner as- 
 he could, the fum of the whole flory he had receiv- 
 ed from Mrs. Mai plus. 
 
 * ' Good God I" faid the lawyer, as foon as Mr. 
 Gocdman had given over freaking, ^' I am con- 
 
 *' founded ^ but pray. Sir, how have you re- 
 
 *' folvtd to do ? — In what way will you proceed ?" 
 *' — -1 hat i muft - fk of you," replied Mr. Good- 
 rr-an,, haftily ; '* you may be certain I will not be 
 
 *' pafnve in this matter. —I only want to know 
 
 *' what courfe I am to fleer." — '' Could you coii- 
 *' fent," cried the lawyer, after a paufe, " to be 
 
 *« divorced from lady McUafm ?'^ " Confem!" 
 
 faid Mr. Goodman, wiih more warmth than before, 
 *' the mcft teirible vexation I endure, dwells ia 
 
 *' tlie confideration, thit fhe is flill my wife ; • 
 
 " were o:ice that name erafed, 1 think I fliould be 
 
 eafyJ' 
 

<#PG# 309>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. ?x9 
 ^' eafy." — *' I hope then foon to fee you (o^'' faij 
 the other ; " but the firft thing we have to do is to 
 *« get the sfHclavirs of the two witnefles, and then 
 * arrcft Marplus.— -Ifliall order it fo with his law- 
 " yer, whom 1 have under my thumb, on account 
 " of fome mrl-praiftices I hav^ detedted him in, 
 *' that he fhall not dare to procure bail for this 
 *' uir-vorthy client.- --In fine, Sir,*' continued he, 
 " I do not doubt, the cafe being (o plain, hut to 
 *' relieve you from paying the penalty of the Init-d ; 
 *' hut, in the mean time, what will you do wiili 
 <' lady Meliafin ?— It is necefiary file fnould be 
 " removed out of the houfe."-;-'' The houfe is 
 •' he!l to me while flie is in it," faid Mr, Good- 
 man. — They had feme furthar talk on this afRiir, 
 and the manner in which Mr. Goc^dman was to 
 conduct himfejf being fettled, a footman was fent; 
 to bid Mrs. Friuks come down. 
 
 That confidante of all her lady's guilty fccrcts 
 could not, now dettdled, b'^hold the face (^f Mr, 
 Goodman, v.ithout the extrcmcft terror and ccnfu- 
 fion :-- he perceived it, as Pne ftood trembling fcarce 
 
 half within the door, not daring to approach, 
 
 " Come near" faid he, " you are a fervant, a4id 
 " below the effe'^s of my refcntment, which o- 
 " thervv'ife you mig'.t have caufe to dread. --I have 
 " a meliagc to fend by you to your lady, ---take 
 *' care you deliver it in the- words I give it."- - 
 On which ilie ventured to advance a few fteps far- 
 ther into the room, and he went on, with a more 
 authoritative voice than Tne had ever heard him af- 
 fume before, in this manner r 
 
 ' Tell her," faid he, ** that for many rcaFons I 
 *' find it wholly improper fhe ihould remain an/ 
 " longer under the Ua^Q roof with me,---defire 
 ^' her therefore to provide a 1< dglng immediately, 
 *' for lierfelf, and all beloneif'g to her ;- -you 
 *"* mufl-all d-put this very r^\^My fo i-t behoves he-.r 
 

<#PG# 310>
300 Thf HIST O R Y of 
 
 *' tobefpeedy in her prfparotions."---" To- night, 
 *^ Sii !" cries Mrs. Prinks r—*^ I Irave laid it, " 
 " rejoined he, fincerely,---" begone ! it is not 
 '* your bufinefs to reply, but to obey."-— She fpoke 
 no more, but retired with much greater hafte than 
 file had entered. 
 
 Mr. Goodman, and his lawyer, were purfuing 
 their difcourfe, on the prefent melancholy occafioii, 
 when the butler came in to lay the cloth for din* 
 ner : as foon as he had finiflied, and fet all the ne- 
 ceflary ut^nfils on the table, Mr. Goodman ordered 
 him to go to Mifs Betfy's chamber, and defire her 
 to come down to dinner. 
 
 That young lady had pafled the morning in a very 
 difagreeable manner :— -the want ot-'repofe the night 
 l>erore had made her lie in bed till the day was very 
 far advanced :-— when (he got up, good-manners, 
 good-breeding, and even common civility, obliged 
 her to enquire after lady Mellafm's health ; and be- 
 ing told, that die was ftill in bed, the fame motives 
 induced her to pay her compliments in perfon, — 
 i )n entering the chamber, a mournful fcene prefcnt- 
 ed itfclf to her eyes: »- lady Mcllafin fat up, fup- 
 po'teJ by her pillows, with all the tokens of defpair 
 and grief, in every feature of her face;— Mifs 
 Flora had thrown herielf on a carpet by the bed-fidc, 
 her head lemming on tb.e ruelie, and her eyes half 
 drowned in tears ; — Mrs. Prinks (food at a little 
 difbnce from them, pale and motionlefs as a flatuc. 
 The approach of Mifs Betfy made fome al- 
 teration in their puftures, and feemed to awake 
 
 them from that lethargy of filent woe ; lady 
 
 Mellafm began to exclaim on the hardnefs of 
 her fate, and the cruelty of Mr. Goodman, who, 
 (he faid, fcemcd glad of a pretence to throw off that 
 afFedlon, v/hichfhchad fiattered heifelf would have 
 been as Jailing as life, and bewailed herfelf in terms 
 fo tender and pathetic, that in fpite of the little 
 
 refpeiSl, 
 

<#PG# 311>
]\Iif.5 Betsv Thoughtless. 301 
 
 refpe^, that Mifs Betfy in reality had for her, and 
 the Juft indignation fhe had for fome time conceived 
 againfl Mifs Flora, her gentle, generous heart was 
 touched with the ftrongeft emotions of pity and for- 
 ^ivenefft. 
 
 As f!ie was far from fufpeding all the grounds 
 Jad)- Mcilafin had for this immoderat-e forrow, and 
 in her foul believiiig that Mr. (locdman would f<ion 
 be brought to forgive both the afVront and the da- 
 jnage his fortune had fulfcred on her account, (lie 
 begged her ladyfhip would not indulge the diclates 
 of defpair, but reflc<5t on the natural fweetnefs of 
 
 Mr. Goodman's difpuiition, the great love he 
 
 had for her, and abov-e all his ilrriSt adherence to 
 thofe principles of -religion, which forbid a Lifting 
 refentment ; — and, in fine, reminded her of 
 every thing fhe could think on for her confolation. 
 
 None of them having yet bieakfalled, flie flayed 
 and drank coffee wit'» them, nor would her com- 
 pafiionate temper have pernilttcil her to quit tliem 
 fo foon as fhe did, if fhe had not been called away 
 to a millener, who was come with fome tilings fhe 
 had the day before ordered to be brought, and fhe 
 had but juft difpatched this little affair, and e;ot out 
 of her defliabille, when (he had received the "above- 
 mentioned mcftage from Mr. Goodman. 
 
 On her coming into the parlour, where dinner 
 was that moment fcrving up, *' I muft requefi the 
 '^ favour of you, Mifs Bctfy," faid Mr. Goodman, 
 
 *' to do tiic honours o{ my table to-da\'."- 
 
 *' I fliall do the bcft I can, fir," replied Mifs Bet- 
 fy. modeftiy, " but am very forry for the occafi- 
 " on, which obliges me to take upon me an of- 
 
 *' fice I am Co littl;; accuftomed to." *' You 
 
 *' will be tiie better afile to ciifcharge it when it 
 " becomes your duty " faid Mr. Goodman, with 
 a half fmile, " but I believe this is the only time I 
 
 *' fliall 
 

<#PG# 312>
303 Ihe HISTORY of 
 
 *' {l\all put you to it. 1 have a kinfwoman, 
 
 ** who I expc6l v/ill be fo good as to take care of 
 •' the affairs of .my family henceforward.'* — '' O, 
 " fir,'* cried Mifs Fetfy, with a great deal cf con- 
 cern, '* I iiope lady Mel a'ln has not for ever fur- 
 " feited her place/' 
 
 Mr. Goodman was about to make feme rcpiv, 
 when they heard the voice of that lady, whom 
 Mifs Betfy had juiT: mentioned, extremely loud up- 
 on the ftairs, " I will not be u fed in this man- 
 
 " ner," cried flie, '* if I mulf go, let him tell me 
 
 " fo himfeif." On this Mr. Goodman grew 
 
 extremely red ; *' Go^^^ faid he, to the foot- 
 man that waited at table, *' and tell lady Meilalln 
 " I v/ill not be diliurbed." — '' Hold,'' cried the 
 lawyer, " permit me, fir, to moderate this matter." 
 
 ^ \n fpeaking thefe words, he rofe haltily, and 
 
 without {taying to hear what Mr. Goodman would 
 {aj^ ran to prevent lady M* lafm from coming in, 
 ■ — While he was gone, " Yes, Alifs Betfy," faid 
 Mr. Goodman, *' you will lofe your companion ; 
 " — Mils Flora, with her naother, leaves my houfe 
 " to-night." 
 
 Mils Betfy, who had gone out of lady MelLifm's 
 chamber, before Mrs. i" rinks brought her»this piece 
 of intelligence frtmi Mr. (joadmari, v/as prodigi- 
 oufly furprifcd to hear him fpeak in this manner. 
 " —It is a fuddcn turn, indeed," purfued he ; " but 
 *' the reafons v/hich urge me to this ftparation. will 
 " hereafter appear fuch as I neither conld nor oug:ht 
 
 " to have reliikd." Mifs Betfy only replying, 
 
 that he was certainly the beft judge of what he did, 
 no farther difcourfe happened on tlvis fabj'vHSl, nor 
 indeed on any other for fome moments. 
 
 At lafi:, however, Mr. (Toodman taking notice, 
 
 tFiat fhe looked more than ordinarily feri us, " Per- 
 
 *' haps,'* faid he, ••' you may think nay houfe too 
 
 '*■ melancholly tor vou, when they are (rone.— -- 
 
 . '-' '£-he 
 

<#PG# 313>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 302 
 
 *' The relation I intend to bring heme, thcugh a 
 " perfect good woman, is pretty far advanced in 
 " years, and I believe receives but few vifits, efpe- 
 " cially from the younger fort ;— but as the houfe 
 " I have liired for Mr. Thoughticfs will be ready 
 ' in a day or two, I fliouid imnginc he would be 
 
 ** glad to have you with him, 'till you marry ; 
 
 " but this," con:inucd he, " is at your own op:ion, 
 " — I but mention it, becaufe I would have you 
 *' entirely eafy in this point, and confider what it 
 '* is will moft contribute to make you fo.'* 
 
 Mifs Betfy had only time to thank 1 im for his 
 goodnefs, before the lawyer came down :— -that 
 gentleman had found a more difhcult tafk than he 
 had expetSted, in brin, ing lady IVlellafm to fubmit 
 to the mjun*5tions flie had recei\ ed from her huf- 
 band,---not that fhe had the Icaft fpark of conjugal 
 affection for him, as the reader may very well fup- 
 pofe, or would have wifhcd ever to fee him more, 
 if (lie could have li\'cd without him in the fame fa- 
 fiiion flie did with him ; but the thoughts of leav- 
 ing her large and richly furni(hed houfe,- -her fine 
 fide-board of plate,-- her coach, --» her equipage, 
 and all thofe other enfigns of opulence and (tate fhe 
 now enjoyed, were infupportabic to her, and hav- 
 ing in vain tfiayed what a feigned penittnce and 
 tendernefs could doy to work him to forgivenefs, 
 had now refulved to try the effed of a more haugh- 
 ty and imperious deportment,-- *' } will make him 
 ^' know I am his wife," cried flie, " and what- 
 *' ever he is poflefl: of, f rm an equal fl;arer in :--• 
 *' let him not therefore think, that wherever he is 
 *' mafter, I fball ceafe to be miilrefs.'* 
 
 The lawyer then remonftrated to her, that though 
 it were true as fhe QicI, that flic had a righi to par- 
 take of his fortune, yer it was ftdl in the power of 
 a hufoand to oblig': her to receive the benefit of that 
 light, in what n an ler, and in wl)at place, Ke 
 
 ihould 
 

<#PG# 314>
304 rbs HISTORY of 
 •ihould think proper :---he told her, Mr. Goodman 
 was determined that fl^e fliould quit his houfe, and 
 that all applications, made by her to the contrary, 
 would be fruitlefs, and exafperate him the more, 
 and only fervc to widen the unhappy breach be- 
 tween them.—'' If Mr. Goodman," faid he, " ha^ 
 *' no other complaint againft your ladyfnip, than 
 -" fimply his paying the penalty of the bond, and 
 *' it may be fome other trifling debts, I cannot 
 " think he will, for any length of time, pcrfevere 
 
 " in his prefent inflexibility of temper." Thefe 
 
 arguments, and fome others he made ufe of, en- 
 forced v/ith all the rhethoric and art he v/as maftcr 
 of, at lafl convinced her, that it was beft for her to 
 yield with a feeming willingnefs to the fate It was 
 not in her power to avoid, and (lie promifed him to 
 fend Prinks directly to hire an apartment for her, 
 at a houfe near Golden fquarc, with the miftrefs of 
 which (lie had fome fmall acquaintance. 
 
 The whole time this gentleman had been with 
 iady Mellafin, the meat v/as kept upon the table, 
 but he would not flay to eat, — '' We have not a 
 '* minute to lofe," ifaid he to Mr. Goodman ;— 
 ** let us go, fir, and difpatchwhat we have to do." 
 With thefe words they both went haftily out of the 
 doors, leaving Mifs Betfy in a good deal of confter- 
 nation at what they v/ere about. 
 
 CHAP. XXXIX. 
 
 Js a kind of olio^ a mixture of mnvy ihhigs^ all of 
 them viry much to the purpcfe, ibi'Vgh lefs enter" 
 taining than fqme others, 
 
 LADY Mellafm, who little expe<Sted that her 
 hufband was made fj well acquainted, or 
 even that he had the lc;.ll thought of the worft part 
 of her behaviour towards him, was r-eady enougi^ to 
 
 flatter 
 

<#PG# 315>
I^ljfj Betsy Thoughtless. o^^ 
 
 flatter herfelf, both frora hex experience of his un- 
 common tender! lefs for her, and from what his law- 
 yer had iniinuateJ, in order to prevail on her to go 
 away with the lefs noife, that when this guft of 
 paffion was blown over, he would be reconciled, 
 and confcTit to her return. 
 
 Thtfc imaginations made her carry it with a high 
 hand before the fervants, and as ihey were packing 
 up her thing?, while Mrs. Prinks was gone to pre- 
 pare a lodging for her. " Your mafler v»ili be 
 
 *•' glad to fetch me home again," cried (be ; 
 
 " poor man I he has been Itrangely wrong-headed 
 
 '* of late. 1 fuppofe he will be ready to hang 
 
 " himfcif when he coniideis what he has done, for 
 *' he may be fijre I fhall not very eafily forgive the 
 *' affront he has put upon me." 
 
 How truly amiiable m an unblemiflied chara6^er, 
 
 and how contemi>tible is the revtrfe ! Servants 
 
 naturally love and refpedl virtue in thofe they live 
 with, and feidom or never cither flatter or conceal 
 
 the vices they do not greatly profit by. The 
 
 airs lady Mcllafm gave herfelf, on this occafion^ 
 were fo far from making thein bciieve her innocent, 
 or their mafter blanieable, that as foon as they had 
 got out of her fight, thay onlv turned her pride, 
 and the fall it was going to fullain, into redicule 
 and grim'^ce. 
 
 Mifs Betfv, however, could not fee them depart 
 in this manner, without feeling a very deep con- 
 cern : their misfortunes obliterated all the re- 
 
 •fentment fhc had at any time conceived againft them, 
 and {he had never before been more angry, even 
 with Mifs Flora, for the treachery (he had been 
 guilty of to her, than flie was now grieved at the 
 fight of her humiliation. 
 
 She was fitting alone, and full of very ferious 
 Tefledions on this fodden change m the family, when 
 
 her brother Thoughtlefs came in : fhc glad o 
 
 ih 
 

<#PG# 316>
3o6 "The HISTORY of 
 the opportunity of founding his inclinations, as to 
 her living with liini, and now rcfolvecl to do it cf- 
 fcvSiually : — fhe began with telling him, the whole 
 flory of lady Mellaun's and Mils Flora's removal, 
 and then complained how ilully flic (hould pals her 
 time, widi only Mr. Goodman, and an old gen- 
 tlewoman, who was to come to be his houfe- keep- 
 er. - " I thought, you were about marrying," 
 
 faid he, *' and expedled from what Mr. Goodman 
 '' wrote to me, that my firfl: compliment to you, 
 " on my arrival, Vv^ould have been to, have wiihed 
 
 " ycu joy. -You are not broke ofF with the 
 
 *' gentleman,— are you ?" 
 
 The carelefs air with which he fpoke thefe word?, 
 flung Mifs Bctfy to the quick j fl:ie took no nfjticc, 
 however, hov/ much Hie was piqued at them, but 
 replied, that the whole affair was mere f . ggeftion ; 
 that it was true, indeed, {he had for fome time re- 
 ceived the addrefles of a gentleman, recommenc'ed 
 by her brother Frai^.k ;- — that he, and fome otlier 
 of her friends, \vc\t very much for the match, and 
 (he fuppofcd had fpoke of it as a thing concluded 
 on, bec;iufe.thcy wiilied it to be (o -, but for her 
 ovv^n part, (lie never had as yet entertained one fe- 
 rious thougiu about the matter, and at prefent was 
 far from having any difpofition to become a wife ; 
 " — fo that," continued flie, " if I am doomed 
 .*' to flay in Mr, Goodman's houfe, 'till 1 am re- 
 *' licvcd that way, it is veiy probable I may be 
 " moped to death, and married to my grave." 
 
 " Where is the neceffity f(;r that ?" faid he.: 
 *' Are there not places enough in town, where you 
 *' may find good company to board, or lodge with?" 
 .*' --Doubtlcfs there are many fuch, fir," replied 
 file, with fome fpirit, *' and if I am fo unhappy as 
 .*' not to have any friend fo kind to make me an 
 *' invitation, fhall be obliged to feek an afylum 
 " among ilrangrers." 
 
 • , Mr, 
 

<#PG# 317>
A///} Be TSY Thought LESS. 307 
 
 Mr. Thoughtlefs locked a little confounded at 
 
 thcfe words ; he had fcen from the beginning 
 
 of her difcouifc, the aim to which it tended, and 
 as he had his own reafons for not complying with 
 her dcfires, would not feem to unJerftand her, 
 bur (he r.ow fpoke too plain, and he was fomewliat 
 at a lofs what anfwer to make, fo as not to give 
 her any caufe of accufin;^ his want of affcvflion, and 
 at the fame time put her off from expeding he 
 would agree to, what (he would have him, in this 
 point, when fortunately for his relief, a letter jult 
 brought by the pofl was prcfented to iVlifs Bctfy. 
 
 '* From L e,'* faid (he, as foon as (he 
 
 took it into her hand. " From brother Frank, 
 
 '' then, I fuppofc," cried he. — '* No," anrvvcred 
 
 fhe, " from lady TruOy : you will excufe mc, 
 
 " brother, while I look over the contents." 
 
 She broke it open while (he was fpeaking, and read 
 to herfclf as follows : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 ' My dear Mifs Betfy\ 
 
 SI R Ralph received yefterday a letter U{d^\ 
 Mr. Though lefs, dated Calais the tiird in- 
 ftanr, fo I doubt not, but by this time I may 
 congratulate you on his fafe arrival in London ; 
 but I am forry to acquaint you, that while you 
 were efnbracing one brother, you were in very 
 great danger of lofmg another ; but do not be 
 
 too much alarmed, 1 hope the w.orft is paft ; 
 
 — I believe he gave you an account hinifclf, that 
 by an unlucky fall from his horfe he was pre- 
 vented from going to London fo foon as he had 
 defigned, but the mifchief done him by this ac- 
 cident, was much greater than he imagined at 
 
 the time of his writing to you. What he took 
 
 only for a common bruife proved to be a contufi- 
 on, and for want of proper care at lirll, thrcught 
 
 ' the 
 

<#PG# 318>
3o8 r/:^ H i S T O R Y cf 
 
 the outrageoufnefs of the pain, foon brought on 
 
 a fever : for two whole days we were ia the 
 
 utmofl apprehenlions for his life, but now, thanks 
 to the auiiior of aii mercies, wc arc afllircd by 
 tliC phyhcian that attends him, and who is ef^ 
 teemed the mof!: fkilful this country affords, that 
 he is \vi a fair way of doing w'ell. — His delirium 
 has quite left him, and he ha? recovered the ufe. 
 
 * of his reafon, fo far as to intreat I would fend the 
 warmefl w:[hes of his heart to you, and to defire 
 you will make the iamj acceptable to his dear 
 brother, if you are yet fa happy as to fee him : 
 —he alfo ei joins you to put his compliments to 
 
 * to Mr. Trueworth, in fuch words as are befitting 
 
 * the friendihip you know he has for him.— -I have 
 
 * much to fay to you from myfelf, on the fcore of 
 that gentleman, and flioulJ be glad to add to the 
 advice I have already given you, but am deprived 
 of that fiuisfaition by the' arrival of fome com- 
 pany, who ar^ come to pafs a week c r tbrtniglit 
 
 * with us, therefore muft defer what I have to {-<\y 
 till another c>ppcrti:nity.-"P'arev;d, JQuy heaven 
 {lin keep you under its protection, and your gcar- 
 
 * dian angel never fail his charge.— -Be ailurCid, 
 ' that though I do not vvrite fo long, nor io often 
 ' to you as I could wifli, I am always, 
 
 ' With the greateftfincerity, 
 * My dear Mifs Bctfy, 
 * Your very afFc(fiionate friend, 
 
 ' And humble fcrvant, 
 
 M. Trusty.' 
 « P, S. I wrote the above this morning, becaufe 
 ' one of our men was to liave gone pretty early 
 
 * to town, but Sir Ralph having fome letters ,of 
 ' his own, which were not then ready, detained 
 ' him, and I have now the pleafure to tell you, 
 ' that the dc6lor, who is this moment come 
 
 * from your brothsr^s chamber, alTures me, that 
 
 " he 
 

<#PG# 319>
iVf(/} Betsy Thoughtless. 309 
 
 ' he has found him wonderfully amended, fince 
 
 * his vifit to him laft night.— Once more, m/ 
 
 * dear, adieu/ 
 
 Mr. 'Fhoughtlefs perceiving feme tears in the 
 eyes of Mifs Betfy, while (he was reading, cried 
 out, " What is the matter, fi(ler ? --I hope no ill 
 " news from the country."— - " Be plcafed to read 
 *' that, Sir," faid flic, giving him thcletter, "and 
 ** fee if I had nut caufe to be afleded, with fome 
 •' part of it." 
 
 *' Poor Frank," faid he, as foon as he had done 
 ** reading, " I am very forry for the accident Iras 
 *' happened to him, but more glad that it is like 
 
 ** to be attended with no worfe confcqucnccs. 
 
 *' Do not be melancholy, my dear lifter, you find 
 " he is in a fair way of recovery, and I hope wc 
 *' fliall foon have him with us. I long very 
 '* much to fee him," continued he, '* and the 
 *' more (o, as I have fpoke in his behalf to a general 
 '* officer, whom I contracted an intimacy with at 
 *' Paris, and who has pronnfcd him all the fcrvice 
 " he can, in procuring him a commiffion." 
 
 They had fome further talk on family affairs, 
 after which he told her, he was troubled to leave 
 her alone, but was obliged to return to fome com- 
 pany he had made an ^ilopement from when he 
 came there. At partirig, he f luted her with a 
 great deal of alTeclion, -dcfired fne would be chear- 
 ful, and faid, he dare believe file had too n^uch 
 merit ever to have any real caufe lo be other wife. 
 
 This tenuernefs very much exhilcrated her droop- 
 ing fpirits,- — fne extertained freili hopes of being 
 ill the houfe with a brother, who (lie found de- 
 figned to live in the moft elcgnntand polite manner, 
 wh'ch v/as what fhe had, at prefent, the moft at 
 heart of any tiling in the world : - the now began 
 to fancy he did not propofc it lo her, either becaufe 
 he did not think fhe would iipprove of it, or be- 
 caufe he feared', that to teflify any defire of remov- 
 ing 
 

<#PG# 320>
310 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 ing her might offend Mr. Goodman, as fhe had 
 boarded with him ever fince (he came to town 5-7- 
 flie therefore refolved to defire the favour of that 
 gentleman to mention it to him, as of his own ac- 
 cord, and let her know v/hat anfvvcr he fhould 
 make.- --This idea gave her fome pleafure for a 
 while, but it was as foon diffipated j— -the thoughts 
 of her brother Frank's misfortune, and the danger 
 fhe could not be furc he was yet perfeflly recovered 
 from, came again into her mind ; but this alfo 
 vanilhed, on remembring the hopes lady Trufly 
 had given her, yet ftili (he was difcontcnted^ though 
 fne knew not well at what. ---In fine, file was fo 
 little accuftomed to reflect much on any thing, 
 much lefs to be alone, that it became extremely 
 ipk^iniie to her,--- " What a wildernefs is this 
 *' houf.' !" cried fhe to herfelf.--" What a fright- 
 *' ful folitude !-— One would think all the world 
 *' knew lady Mellailn and Mifs Flora were gone, 
 '* that nobody comes near the door.— How Ifill ? 
 *' How quiet is every thing ?*'--- Then would (lie 
 flart from her chair, meafure how many paces were 
 in the room, ---look at one pi6fure,--then on ano- 
 ther,- -then on her own refemblance in the great 
 giafs;---but all this would not do :— (he wanted 
 fomebody to talk to,---f!3mething new to amufe 
 herfelf with.---" I wonder," faid flie, " what is 
 *' become of Trueworth,---! have not fecn him 
 *< thefe three days,- --indeed I ufcd him a little ill 
 '' at our laft converfation ;— but what of that ? 
 *^ If he loves me as well as he profeiTes, he will 
 " not fure pretend to be affronted at any thing I do. 
 *' •- My brother defires me to give his compli- 
 " ments, but if the man will not come to receive 
 " them, 'tis none of my fault ;--- yet after all," 
 continued (lie, having paufcd a little, " what pri- 
 " vilege has our fex to infult and tyranize over the 
 ** men.?— It is certainly both ungenerous and un- 
 
 " grateful 
 

<#PG# 321>
Mifs 
 
 ufs BETsr Thoughtless, 311 
 
 ** grateful to ufe them the worfe, for ufing us, 
 " perhaps, better than we deferve.---Mr. U>ue- 
 *' worth is a man of fetife, and, if J were in his 
 " place, I would not take fuch treatment from 
 '* any woman in the world. --I could not much 
 *' blame him if he never faw me more. ---Well, --- 
 " when next he comes, I will, however, behave 
 '' to him with more refpedt." 
 
 Thus did the di6lates of a truly rcafonablc wo- 
 man, and the idle humour of a vain coquette, pre- 
 vail by turns over her fluctuating mind :--her ad- 
 venture at Mifs Forward's canie frefli into her 
 head ;---fhe was in fome moments angry with Mr. ' 
 Trueworth for offering his advice; in others, more 
 angry with hcrfelf, for not having taken it.--- She 
 remained in this perplexity till a (crvant, finding it 
 giew late, and that his maftcrdid not fup at home, 
 came in, and afked her if fhe would not pleafe to 
 have the cloth laid, to which fhe anfwered, with 
 all her heart ; on which, the table being immedi- 
 ately fprcad, (lie eat of fomething that was there, 
 and Toon after went to bed, where, 'tis probable. 
 Die loft in flecp, both all the pleafure and the pain 
 of her paft meditations. 
 
 Mr. Goodman was all this while, as well for fe- 
 veral fucceeding days alfo, bufily employed on an af- 
 fair no lefs difagreeable than it was new to him j but 
 by the diligence and adroitnefs of his lawyer, he 
 got the affidavits, the warrant, and every thing 
 necefTary for the intended profecution of Marplus 
 and lady Mellafin, ready much fooncr, than many 
 others would liave done, or he himftlfhad expedttd. 
 
 The fatigue and perplexity he was under was 
 indeed very great, as may be eafily fuppofcd, yet 
 did it not render him negUj6iful of Mifs Betfy :--- 
 (he h:d defircd* him to fpeak to her brother on her 
 account, and he did fo the firft opportunity,-- not 
 as if the thine had been mentioned by her, but a^ 
 
 if 
 

<#PG# 322>
312 ^he HISTORY of 
 
 if he, in the prcfent fituation of his family, thou^it 
 
 her removal convenient. 
 
 Mr. Thoughtlefs, from what his fiQer had faid, 
 expeded he Ihould onctsme or other be fpoke more 
 plainly to upon that fubject, had prepared himfelf 
 with an anfwer ;---he told Mr. Goodm.in, that 
 nothing could have been more fatisfadory to him, ^ 
 than to have his fider vi'ith him, if her being fey' 
 were any ways proper;—-" but,'' faid he, *' as I 
 " am a fingle man, I {hall have a crowd of gay 
 *' young fellows continually coming to my houfc, 
 *^ and 1 cannot anfwer that all of them would be 
 *' able to behave with that ftiidt decorum, which 
 *' I ihould wiili to fee always obferved towardti a 
 *' perfon fo near to me : --her prefence, perhaps, 
 '* might be fome check upon them, and theirs no 
 " lefs difagreeable to her.— In fine, Mr. Good- 
 '* man," continued he, " it is a thing wholly in- 
 *' confiflent with that freedom I propofe io live 
 *' in, and I would not have her think on it." 
 
 It was not that this gentleman wanted natural 
 affedion for his fii^cr, that he refufed what he was 
 fenfible ihe fo much defired, but he was at prefent 
 fo circumdanced, that to have complied would, 
 Uiider a fhew of kindnefs, have done jier a real in- 
 jury.-- He had brought with him a young and very 
 beautiful miftrefs from Paris, of whom he was fond, 
 and jealous to that extravagant degree, that he could 
 fcarce fuffer hc^r a moment from hisfight:— he had 
 promifed her the fole command of his houfe and . 
 fervants, and that fhe (hould appear as his wife in all . 
 refpeds except the name.- --How could he, there- , 
 fort, brina: home a filler, who had a light to, and 
 doubtlefs would have claimed all thofc privileges a- 
 nother was already in pofluiiion of ?— - And how • 
 would it have agreed wiih the charader of a virtu- 
 ous young lady, to have lived in ti^e fame houfe . 
 with a woman kept by her brother as his miftrefs .? ; 
 
 But 
 

<#PG# 323>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 31J 
 
 But this was a lecret mils Bctiy was as )ec 
 wholly unacquainted witk ^ and when mr. Good- 
 man repeated to her what had pafled between 
 rthem, on her (core, and the excufe her brother 
 had made for not complying with the propofal, 
 fhe thought it i^o weak, and withal i'o unkind, 
 that ihe could not forbear burlting into tears ; -— 
 the good-natured old gentleman could not lee 
 her thus afflicled without being extremely con- 
 cerned, and laying many kind things to pacify 
 her : — *' Do not weep," laid he, *' I will make 
 " it my bufineis, — nay my lludy, to procure 
 " lome place where you miv be boarded to your 
 " ratisfadion." — '' I bec», lir, that you will noc 
 
 " millake my meaning, I iV) a/Ture you, fir, 
 
 •' I am not wanting in feiilibility of your good- 
 " nefs to all our family, and to me in particular. 
 *' -^I mull indeed be ftrauL^-ily ftupid not to 
 *' think myfelf hajipy under the protection of a 
 *' gentleman of fo liunuine and benign a difpofiti- 
 *' on. — No, fir, be perlwaded there is n(i houle 
 *' in London, except that of an own brother, I 
 " woald picfer to yours 5 •— I will, therefor'^, 
 *' with your permifTuMi, continue here, norenter- 
 " tain the leaft thought of removing, unlels fome 
 " accident yet unf >rereen (blige me to it/' 
 
 Mr. Goodman then told her, that he fhould be 
 glad /he would always do what was mod for her 
 own eafe. This was all the difcourfe they had 
 Upon this head, and when mils Betfy began to 
 confider ferioufly on the behaviour both of lady 
 Mellafin and mifs Flora, fhe found there was lit- 
 tle reafon for her to regret the lo(s of their focie- 
 ty^ — nor that Ihe ought to think mr. Good- 
 man's houfe lels agreeable for theif being out of 
 itj — llie received all fuch as Ihe approved of, 
 who had come to vifit them, and by doing i^o 
 were acquainted with her, and as to thole, who 
 Vol. I. P vifitejl 
 

<#PG# 324>
514 "J^he HISTORY of 
 
 viiiied hcclclf in particular, it was the fame as 
 ever. — Mr. Goodman's kinlwoman, now his 
 Jioufekeepeer, was a well-bred, accomplifhed 
 woman, and a chearful agreeable companion 5-'^ 
 ihe leemed Itudious to oblige her ^ — all the 
 iervants were ready to do every thing fhc defired, 
 and it would have been difEciih fgr her to have 
 found any place where fl-je could have been bet- 
 ter accommodated, or have had more caufe to be 
 contented 3 and flie would doubtlels have thought 
 herfelf more happy than ihe had ever been ^w\zt^ 
 her coming to mr. Goodman's, if other things 
 of a different nature had not given her fome un- 
 quiet moments. 
 
 But befides the unkindnefs of one brother, on 
 whom ihe had built the moil pleafing hopes, and 
 the indifp(;firion of another, for whom fhe had a 
 very great ,affe6:ion, the late behaviour of mr. 
 Trueworrh gave her much miuter of mortifica- 
 tion : — ili'e had not leen him for upwards of a 
 week,-— (lie imputed this abfence to the rebuff 
 jhe had given him at his hit vifit 5 and though 
 ihe could not avoid confeffing in her heart, that 
 111 e bad treated him neither as a gentleman, nor 
 a friend, yet her vanity having iuggefted, that he 
 was incapable of refenting any thing fhe did, re- 
 ceived a prodigious iliock by the di'appointment 
 it now fuflained. 
 
 _— — — —. , ^, 
 
 C H A P. XL. 
 
 (Contains only fwb 'fb'ings as the reader might 
 reasonably i%ocQ to ha'je been informed of be- 
 fore. 
 
 IT v/?s the fate of mi fs Berfy to a-ttra6^ » great 
 number (»f admirers, but never to keep alive, 
 
 for anv kngth of time, the i]fi.m© ihe had infpireii 
 
 them i 
 

<#PG# 325>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 315 
 
 them with. — • Whether this was owing to the in- 
 conftancy of the addrdTers, or the ill conduct of 
 the perfon addreiTed, cannot ablohitely be deter- 
 mined ; but it is highly probable, that both thele 
 motives might fometimes concur to the lofing hec 
 fo many conquells. — Mr. Trueworth had beea 
 the molt aflfiduous, and alio the moll perlevering 
 of all, that had ever yet wore her chains j—— his 
 love had compelled his judgment to pay an im- 
 plicit obedience to her will ;— — he had Ibbmitred 
 to humour all the little extravagancies of her 
 temper, and affe(5led to appear eafy at what his 
 real()n could not but difapprove^ — — he had flat- 
 tered himfelf, that all that was blameworthy in 
 her would wear ofif by degrees, and that every 
 error would be her laft, 'till a Jong I'ucceflion of 
 repeated inadvertencies made him firlt begin to 
 fear, and then to be convinced, that however in- 
 nocent riie mi«hr be in fail, her manner of bt-ha- 
 \ lour would A\ luit with the charafler lie wifhed 
 iiiould always be maintained by the WQman he 
 made choice of for a wite. 
 
 His meeting her at mils Forward^ her ob- 
 ftinare perlilling in going to the play with thic 
 abandoned creature, after the remonllrances he 
 had made her on that I'core, — her returning 
 hoi-.ie lo late, and in dilbrder, condLj<fted by a 
 firanger, — m iine, what he law himfelf, and 
 had been told, concerniiuj the proceedings of that 
 night, gave the flnifhing Itroke to all his hopes, 
 that /he would ever, at leail while youth and 
 beauty lailed, be brought to a juft leniibility of 
 the faJhion in which fhe ought to a(51. 
 
 If the letter, contrived and lent by the mir- 
 th ievous mifs Flora, had reached his' hands but 
 two days iooner, it would have had no other ef- 
 ie6l upon him, than to make him ipurn th-e in- 
 veulive (croli bcue-uh his feet, and wi(h to ierve 
 P 2 . Hoc 
 

<#PG# 326>
3i6 The HISTORY of 
 
 the author in the lame manner 5 but poor niifs 
 Betiy had, hy her own milmanagemenr, prepared 
 liis heart to receive any impyeflions to her preju- 
 dice, yet was the Icandal it contained of io grofs 
 a kind, that he could not prefently give into the 
 
 belief of it, ' Good God !' cried he, * it is 
 
 impciTible ^ — if fhe has fo little ienfe of ho- 
 nour, or reputation, as the lightnefs of her car- 
 riage makes fome people too ready to imagine, 
 her very pride is fufficient to fecure her virtue : 
 •— file would not, — could not condefcend to 
 the embraces of a man, who thought fo mean- 
 ly of her, as to attempt the gaining her C)n any 
 other fcore than that of marriage ! — — and yet,' 
 purfued he, after a pa-ufe, * who knows, but that 
 v^ry pride, which feenis to be her defence, may 
 have contributed to her fall ?— — S\\Q. has vanity 
 enough to imagine fhe may a6i: with impunity 
 what ihe would condemn in others. — She 
 might fancy, as the Poet fays, 
 
 * That faulrleis form could act no crime, 
 
 * But heav'n, on looking on it, mull: foigive.' 
 
 * Why then,' continued he, * Ihould the fool- 
 ifh remains of that tenderneisi once had for her 
 make me ftill hefitate to believe iier guiby ? — 
 No, — no, the account before me has too much 
 the face of truth 5 it is too circumflantial to be 
 the work of meer invention. —No one would 
 forge a lie, and at the lame time prefent the 
 means of detecting it to be lb. — Here is the 
 village Tpecified,- — the nurle's r.amc, — a par- 
 ticular direction how I may convince myfclf of 
 the fhameful truth. -— There is no room to 
 doubt.' 
 
 To Ihengthen the op'nion he had now of her 
 guilt, the words mifi) liora had fa id to him, re- 
 turned to his remembrance..^ — * That there was 
 ' a time when mifsBetfy hud (r.ulted her with her 
 
 '• deareit 
 

<#PG# 327>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 327 
 
 * deareft fecrets.' — ' Her dearell fecrets!' cried 
 he ? — * What fecrets can a virtuous young lady 
 
 * have, that fluin the light, and require ("0 much 
 
 * fidelity in the concealment of? — Nv>, — no, 
 
 * — it mufl be this mifs Flora meaned by that em- 
 
 * phatic exprefTion.—— The orher could not hide 
 
 * the conlequence of her Ihaineful palTion from 
 
 * the family ,—*- lady Mellaiin and mifs Flora 
 
 * muii know k, and perhaps many more, who, 
 
 * while they were witneiles of the refpe^t I paid 
 
 * her, laughed at the folly of mv fond credu- 
 
 ' lify.' 
 
 Thus at fume times did he believe her no lefs 
 guilty tlian the letter laid, but at others, fenti- 
 ments of a diHercnt nature prevailed, and plead- 
 ed in her favour 5 — — her advc;nture witl) the gen- 
 tleman commoner at Oxford came into his head : 
 — ' If the too great gaiety of her temper,' faid 
 he, * led her into a danger, /lie then had cou- 
 
 * rage and virtue to extricate herlelf out of it.' 
 — He alio recolledled levcral cxprefTions fh« 
 had calually let fall, teftifying her dildain and 
 abhorrence of every thing that had the leaft ap- 
 pearance of indecency ^— but then relapfing in- 
 to his former doubts,*—' Yet who,' cried he, 
 again, * can account for accident ?——* flie might 
 
 * in one unguarded moment grant what in aiw- 
 
 * ther file would blufh to think of.' 
 
 How terrible is the fituation of a lover, wha 
 endeavours all he can to reco-ncile his reaibn to 
 his padion, yet to which flde loever he bends his 
 thoughts, finds th. 2111 things fo diamerrically op- 
 pofite and incompatible, that either the one op 
 the other mull be totally renounced. —— Willing 
 therefore to take the party, which would belt be- 
 come his honour and reputation, mr. Trueworth 
 reiolved to banifli from his mind all the ideas of 
 thofe amiable qualities he had admired in mifs 
 P 5 Belly, 
 

<#PG# 328>
3i8 ne HISTORY of 
 
 JBetfy, and remember only thofe which gave him 
 occafion for diCgufl: 
 
 But this WIS a tafk not fb eafy to be acconj- 
 plifhed as he imagined 5 for though the ir- 
 regularity of mifs BetfV's condnfl was of itfelf 
 fufficienf to deter him from a marriage with her, 
 yet he found he flood in need of all helps to ena- 
 ble him to drive that once fo pleafing objedt en- 
 tirely from his mind. 
 
 To be therefore more fully confirmed how ut- 
 terly unworthy /he was of his regard, than could 
 be made by this anonymous acculation, he went in 
 perfon d-own to Dcnham, where following the di- 
 re(5lions given him in the letter, the cottage where 
 Goody Bufliman lived was prefently pointed out 
 to hinij by the fiifl perfon he enquired of.— 
 
 * So far, at lead,* faid he to himfelf, * the letter- 
 
 * writer has told truth.*— He then fent his fer- 
 vant with the horfes to wait his return at a public 
 houfe in the village, and walked towards the 
 place he came in fearch of. 
 
 He found the honeit countrywoman holding a 
 child in her arms on one fide of the fire,— two 
 roly boys were fitting oppofice to her, with each 
 a great piece of bread and butter in his hand. — - 
 At fight of a ftrange gentleman flie got off her 
 itat, and dropping a low curtefy, cried, * Do you 
 
 * pleale to want my husband, fir?'*—* No', laid 
 Hir. Trueworth, * my bufinefs is with you, if you 
 
 * are mrs. Bufhman.' — ' Goody Buihman, an't 
 
 * pleafe you, fir,' replied flie. ^ — • And then bid- 
 ding the boys get further from the chimney, reach- 
 ed him the handfomell joint-ftool her cottage af- 
 forded for him to fit down. 
 
 He told her, that he had a kinfwoman, who 
 had Ibme thoughts of putting a child to nurfc in- 
 to the country, — that (he had been recommend- 
 ed •*-— ' bur,' (kid he, * can we have nothing ta 
 
 ' drink 
 

<#PG# 329>
Mifs BetsV Thoughtless. 319 
 
 * drink together ? — What fort of liqnor does 
 
 * this part of the world afford,'— -* Alack fir/ 
 replied fhe, * you fine gentlemen, mayhap, mar 
 ' like nothing but wine, and there is none to be 
 
 * had any nearer than Uxbridjpe.' -^* Nor cy- 
 
 * der,' cried he. — * I am afraid none good* re- 
 plied fhe, * b:it there is pure good ale down the 
 
 * lane, if your honour could drink thar.' «—* k 
 
 * is all one to me,' faid -mr. Trueworth, * ifyovi 
 
 * like it yourfelf.'—— Then turning to him wlio 
 feemed the eldeit of th« two boys, ' I Ihppoie, 
 
 * my lad,' continued he, * you can procure us a 
 
 * tankard of this fame ale.' — * Yes, fir/ cried 
 his mother, haftily, ' go to Philpot's, and bid 
 
 * them lend a can of their beft ale, and, do you 
 
 * hear, defire my dame to draw it herfelf.' — 
 Mr. Trueworth then g^ve the boy fume money, 
 and he went on his errand, prudently taking with 
 him a large flice of bread that feappened to lie 
 upon the drefler. 
 
 * That is a fine child yon have in your Jap/ 
 faid mr. Trueworth, * is it your own?'-*-* No. 
 ' fir/anfwered Hie,—* this is a young Londoner. 
 — •* Some wealthy citizen's, I fuppofe/ rejoined 
 l^e. »— ^* No, by my truly, fir/ faid Hie, * it has 
 neither father not mother, and belike muft have 
 gone to the parifh, if a good fweet young lady 
 had not taken pity of it, and given it me to 
 nurle 5 and, would you think it, fir, is as kind 
 to it, and pays a^ punctually for it, as if it were 
 her own.—— My husband goes up to London 
 every month to receive the money, and (he ne- 
 ver lets him come home without ir,and gives him 
 over and above fix- pence or a Hiilling to drink 
 upon the road j — poor man,— — he loves a ihp 
 of good ale dearly, — that's all his fault,— 
 though I cannot iky he ever negle^s his bufi- 
 neis3^;^|he is up| early and down late, and 
 P 4 * ' docs 
 

<#PG# 330>
320 rhe HISTORY of 
 
 * does a power of work for a little money. — 
 
 * Sir Roger Hill will employ nobody but him, 
 
 * and good reafon, becaufe he makes him take 
 
 * whatever he pleafes, and that is little enough, 
 
 * God knows, for he is a hard man, and if it were 
 ' not for my nurfing, we could not make both 
 
 * ends meet, as the faying is ^ — ^ but he is our 
 
 * landlord, and we dare not dilbblige him.' 
 
 This innocent countrywoman would probably 
 have run on with the whole detail of her family 
 affairs, if mr. Trueworth, defirous of turning the 
 tide of her communicative difpofition into a chan- 
 nel more fatisfaf^ory to his curiofity, had not in- 
 terrupted her. 
 
 ' lliis \'i a verv extraordinary charity you have 
 
 * been telli* g me of,' iiud he, ' el'pecially in a 
 
 * young lady ^ — {\\^ muft certainly be fome- 
 
 * what of kin to th* child,'——* None in the 
 
 * varfal world, fir,' anfwered llie, * only her god- 
 
 * mother.' — The boy now bringing m the ale, 
 nir. True worth was obliged to tafte ir, and teftify 
 fome fort of approbation, as the good woman 
 had praifed it lb much 5 but he made her drink a 
 hearty draught of it, after which, * And pray,* 
 refumed he, ' what is the name of the child V 
 •— * O fir, replied Hie, the lady has given it 
 
 her own name, Betfy;— file is called mifs 
 Betfy Thoughtlefs herlelf, — though ilie is a 
 woman grown, and might have had a child or 
 two of her own,* — but you know, fir, they 
 are all called mifs 'rill they are married.' 
 Mr. Trueworth in the prefent diflurbance of 
 his thoughts making no reply, fhe went on : • 
 
 * She is a fweet young lady, I can tell you, fir.' 
 
 * faid file ; I never faw her but once, and that 
 ' was when I went to fetch the child, Aie ufed 
 
 * me with fo much familiarity, — not a bit proud, 
 
 * charged me to take care of her little Betfv, and 
 
 '* told 
 

<#PG# 331>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 321 
 
 ' told nie, if fhe lived, I (hould keep her till 
 ' /lie was big enough to "o to fchoo), — and told 
 ' me, (lie would have her learn to write, and 
 ' read, and work ; — and then (he would put her 
 
 * 'prentice to a niantua-miker, or a milliner, or 
 
 * Ibme fuch pretty trade, — and then who knows^^ 
 
 * iir,' continued fhe, holding up the child at arms 
 length, and dancing it, but ibme great gentleman 
 
 * or other may fall in love with my little Bctfy, 
 
 * and I may live to lee her ride in her coacli? 
 
 * — 1 warrant (lie will make much of her old* 
 
 * nurfe.* 
 
 * There are many (Irange things happen in the 
 
 * world, indeed,' laid mr. Trueworth, with ^ 
 ligh. After which, thinking there wis no further 
 diicovery to be made, he role up to go away j 
 but feeing the change of tht: money he had fenr, 
 by the boy for the beer, lie upon the table, he 
 gave it to him, faying, * Here, my good boy, 
 
 * take this, and divide it with your brother, ta 
 
 * buy apples.' — Then turning xo the nurfe 
 took his leave of her with this complimenr, 
 
 * Well, mrs. Bufhrnan, I believe you are a very 
 
 * honeft careful Woman, and (hall not fail to re- 
 
 * member you whenever it comes in my way,w 
 
 * •^-— In the mcjn time, added he, putting a 
 crown piece into her hands, * take this, and make 
 
 * merry with your husband.' •— The poor woman 
 was fo tranfported, that fhe knew not how to 
 rhank him fufficiently, — fhe made twenty cur- 
 tefies, crying, ' heaven bleis you, fir 3 — you 
 
 * are a right noble gentleman I am fure. — Marry 
 
 * fuch guefh come not every day.'— And witl> 
 ft>Q.h like expre{lii;ns of gratitude, followed him 
 'till he was quite out of hearing. 
 
 What now could this enquiring lover tl>ink ? 
 
 ——Where was the lealt room for any conje<5hire 
 
 ii) favour of mjfs Bcrly's innoc^iiice, to gain en- 
 
 . P 5 trance 
 

<#PG# 332>
322 the HISTORY c/ 
 
 rrance into his breaft ? — He had feen the child, 
 — • had heard by whom, and in what manner it 
 was delivered : — the charge given with it, and 
 the prnmiies made for its future proteflion, and 
 whether the nurfe was really fo weak as to be 
 impofed upon by this pretence of charity, or whe- 
 ther bribed to impofe it upon others, the fa6l, as 
 related in the letter, appeared to him fo plain, 
 from every circumftance, as to admit no poflibility 
 of a doubr. 
 
 A marriage with mifs Betfy was, therefore, 
 jnow quite out of the queflion with him , — the 
 fa/liion of entirely breaking with her, was the on- 
 ly thing that puzzled him.— Loth he was to re- 
 proach her wirh the caufe, and equally loth to be 
 deemed fb inconllant, as to quit her without a 
 ji>(tifiable one. — He remained in this dilemma 
 for the fpace of two days, at the expiration of 
 which, after much debating* within himlclf, he 
 wrote, and fent to her, by a lervanr, the follow- 
 ing epiftle : 
 
 To mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 ' M adam, 
 
 * OP PI E very ill fuccefs I have met with, In 
 
 * •*■ the only bufineis which brought me to this 
 
 * town, has determined me to quit it with all pol- 
 
 * fible expedition, and not to think of a return, 
 
 * 'till 1 find myfelf in a difpofition more capable of 
 
 * relifhin^ its pleafures. You have given rne, 
 
 * madam, too many inliances how little agreeable 
 
 * my prel.ence has ever been, not to convince me, 
 
 * that I ftand in no need of an apology for not wait- 
 
 * ing on you in perfon, and that this diftant way 
 
 * of taking my leave will be lefs unwelcome to 
 
 * ,you than a vifit, which perhaps would only have 
 
 * interrupted your more gay amufements, and 
 
 * broke 
 

<#PG# 333>
Mifs Betsy TtrotcHTLEss. 523.- 
 
 *' broke in for fome moments, on (hit round of 
 ' pleafurcs, with which you are perpetually en- 
 
 * compafled. — — May you long enjoy all the feli- 
 
 * cities the fafhion you chufe to live in can beftov/y 
 ' while I retire to folitude, and lolt in conteiu- 
 ^'plation, on fome late aftonifhing occurrences, 
 
 * cry out with the poet : 
 
 * There is no wonder, or elfe all is wonder.' 
 
 ' If I fpeak in riddles, a very iinall retro fpe 61: 
 
 ''on fome remarkable paflages in your own con- 
 
 ' du6t will ferve for the folution j— but that 
 
 'might probably be impofing on yourfelf too 
 
 * great a tallc. — I fliall therefore trouble you no 
 
 * farther than to affure you, that though I ceafe to 
 
 * fee you, I Hiall never ceile to be, 
 
 * With the moll friendly wifhes, 
 * Madam, 
 
 * Your very humble fervanf, 
 
 * C. Tr uewor th. 
 Mr. Trueworth having difpatch'd this letter, 
 which he doubted not but would finifh all his con- 
 cerns with mifs Betly, thought he had nothing 
 more to di), than to take leave of the friends he 
 had in town, and retire to his feat in the country, 
 and there endeavour to lofe the remembrance of 
 all that had been difpieafing to him (ince he left 
 it. 
 
 CHAP. XLI. 
 
 L of very fmall importance, yet contains fucb 
 T kings a hi he reader may exped to hear. 
 
 WHILE mr. Trueworth was employing 
 himfelf in exploring the truth otniils Bet- 
 fy*s imaginary crime, and hunting after fecrets to 
 render her more unworthy of his love, that young 
 lady's head was no lefs tiiken up with him, though 
 
 in 
 

<#PG# 334>
324 yi-^ H I S T O R Y of ' 
 
 in a widely different manner 5 — fhe wanted not 
 a juft fenle of the merits, both of his perfon and 
 paffion^ nnd though a plurality of lovers, the 
 power of flattering the timid with vain hopes, and 
 awing tlie proudelt into fubmiffion, feemed to her 
 a greater triumph, than to be the wife of the molt 
 delerving man on earth, yet when Ihe confulted 
 her heart, flie found and avowed within herfelf, 
 fne could part with that triumph, with lefs reluc- 
 tance in favour of mr. Trueworth, than of any 
 other (lie yet had feen. 
 
 His abfence, therefore, and the flrange neglefl 
 he teftiilc'd in not fending to acquaint her with, the 
 caufe, gave her as much inqietude, as a perfon 
 oF her humour c(^uld be capable of feeling j — but 
 v;heiher it proceeded in reality from the firfl 
 Shootings of a growing inclination, or from that 
 Yanity, which made her dread the lofsof fo ac- 
 compliHi'd a lover, cannot be eafily determined ? 
 — ^ but to which foev^r of thefe caules it was ow- 
 ing, I think we may be pretty certain, that had 
 he vifitcd her in the iituation her mind then was, 
 he v;ould have had no reafbn to complain of his 
 reception. 
 
 She never went abroad without flattering her- 
 felf with the expe^fation of hearing, on her return 
 Iiorne, that he had been there, or at leaft that 
 ibme letter or meflage from him had been left 
 for her, and every difappointment involved her 
 in frelh perplexity.- — In fine, if flie had confi- 
 dered him v^ith half that jull regard, while he con- 
 tinued to think her vvorihy of his afieftions, as fhe 
 was beginning to do when he was endeavouring 
 to drive ail favourable ideas of her from his mind, 
 they might both have been as happy as atprefent 
 they were the contrary. 
 
 She had been with mifs Mabel, and two other 
 ladies of her acquaintance, to lee that excel- 
 lent 
 

<#PG# 335>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 3^^ 
 
 lent comedy, called theCarelels Husband : — /lie 
 was very much afi:e6led with lonie fee nes in ir :— 
 /he imagined Ihe faw heiTeJf jn the charaiier of 
 lady Betty Modilh, and mr. Tiueworth in that of 
 lord Morelove, and came home full of the moft 
 ferious refleftions, on the folly of indulging an 
 idle vanity, at the cxpence of a man of honour 
 and finceriry. - — She was no looner within the 
 doors, than the letter above-meniioned was put 
 into her hands, ——as they told her, it had been 
 left for her in the beginning of the evening, by 
 one of Mr. Trueworth's lervants, and fhe knew 
 both by the fuperlcriprion, and device on the feal, 
 that it came from that gentleman. Hie ran haflily 
 up flairs to her chamber, in order to examine the 
 contents- but what flutterings feized her hejrt ! 
 " — What an univerlal agitation difTufed itfelf 
 through all her frame, on reiding even the firit 
 lines of this cruel epiftle ! * Good heaven !" cried 
 
 * file, ' going out of town, — not to return."—. 
 And then having proceeded a liitle further j — 
 
 * V\ har," added flie, ' not fee me before he goes, 
 
 * —^ fiire the man is either mad, or 1 am in a 
 
 * dream.' 
 
 Surprife, and foms mixture of a tender re- 
 morfe, were the firil emotions of her foul ^ but 
 when fhe came to that part of the letter, which 
 feemed to refle<^ upon her conduft, and the way 
 in which flie chofe t'o.live, her native haughtinels 
 reaffumed its former power, and turned her alT 
 into dildain and rage.— * No retrofpefft,' faid 
 /he, * on my own behaviour, can ever juffify the 
 V audacious reproaches he treats me with.— If I 
 
 -* have been to blame, it is not his province to 
 
 [ •upbraid me with it.' 
 
 As fhe was entirely ignorant of the bafe artifice 
 
 ''tad been put in prailice againft her, and was con- 
 Icious of no fault mr. True worth had to accufe 
 
 her 
 

<#PG# 336>
325 W^ HISTORY of 
 
 her of, but that of her going with mifs Forward 
 to the play, after the warning he had given her 
 of the danger, it muft be confefled, fhe had a 
 right to think the provocation too flight to draw 
 from him fuch refentfiil expreffions, much lefs to» 
 induce him to abandon her. 
 
 * Ungrateful man,' faid ihe, burlting into tears 
 of mingled grief and fpite, ' to ufe me thus, 
 
 * when I was juffc beginning to entertain the kind- 
 
 * eft thoughts of him ! — • When I was ready to 
 
 * acknowledge the error I was guilty of, in not 
 
 * following his advice, and had refolved never to 
 
 * throw myfelf into i'uch inconveniencies again. 
 
 * — 'Tis plain he never loved me, or he would 
 
 * not have taken fo poor,—* fo trifling a pretence 
 
 * to break with me.* 
 
 Thus, for fome moments, did /he bewail, as- 
 it were, the ill treatment flie thought fhe had re- 
 ceived from him. -^— Then looking over the let- 
 ter again, * With what a magifterial air,' cried 
 file, *^ with what an affeflation of fuperiority 
 
 * does he conclude !— With the moft friendly 
 
 * wiilies my humble fervant. — • Good lack ! 
 *•— friendly !— let him carry his friendly 
 
 * wiihes to thole he may think may receive them 
 
 * as a favour/ 
 
 Upon revolving in her mind all the circum- 
 ftances of her behaviour towards mr. Trueworrh, 
 fhe could find nothing, except what pafled at his 
 laft vifit, that could give him any occafion for dif- 
 guif, and even that ihe looked upon as a very in- 
 iufEcient plea for that high refentment he now, 
 cxprcfled, much more for his refolving to throw 
 off a paflion he had a thoufand and a thoufand 
 times vowed fhould be as lafting as his life, 
 i The anonymous letter fent her by mifs Flpra, 
 fome time fince, now came frefh into her mind 5 
 r— ' that paflage in it, which inlintiated, that mr. 
 
 Trueworrh 
 

<#PG# 337>
Mifs Betsv Thoughtless. 327 
 
 Trueworth had no real defign of marrying her, 
 — — that he but trifled with her, and on the arrival 
 of her brothers would find feme pretence or other 
 to break entirely with her, fecnied now to tally 
 exaftly with his prefent manner of proceeding. 
 — * The devil/ laid (he, * may fome time fpeak 
 ' truth, mr. Trueworth has but too well ve- 
 
 * rified the words of that malicious girl, and what 
 
 * /he herfelf then thought a filfhood is now con- 
 
 * firmed by fad j— yet, wherefore,* cried /he 
 again, * did he take all this pains, if he never 
 
 * loved me, — never hoped any recompence for 
 
 * hisdiflimulation, what end could he propofe by 
 
 * pra<5tifing it? — What advantage, what plea- 
 
 * lure could it give him to affront the fifter of his 
 ' friend, and impofe upon the credulity of a wo- 
 
 * man he had no defign upon?'- It would be 
 
 endle/sto repeat the many contradi«5lory furmifes, 
 which rofe alternately in her dillrafled mind, ib 
 I /liall only fay, /lie fought, but the more Hie 
 did fo, the more /lie became incapable of fathom- 
 ing the bottom of this myfterious event. 
 
 The butler was laying the cloth in the parlour 
 for fupper when Ihe came home, Mr. Good- 
 man had waited for her fome time, thinking flie 
 might be undrefling, and now lent fo defire /lie 
 
 would come down 5 but /he begged to be 
 
 excufed, — faid Ihe could not eat, and then 
 called for Kanny, who was the maid that ufualJy 
 attended her in her chamberj to come up and put 
 her to bed. 
 
 This prating wench, who would always know 
 the whole fecrets of every body in the family, 
 whether they thought fit to entruft her with theni 
 or not, ufed frequently to divert mifs Betfy with 
 her idle /lories 5 but it was not now in her power, 
 — that young lady had no attention for any 
 thing, but the object of her prefent meditations, 
 
 which 
 

<#PG# 338>
328 The HISTORY of 1 
 
 which tl^e other not happening to hit upon, was '- 
 anTwered only wirh peevidinels and ill humour. 
 
 But as eveiy little circumftance, if any way 
 adapted to the pafTion we at that time are poflefled 
 of, touches upon the jarring ftring, and leems a 
 milTioner from fate 5 an accident, the molt trifling 
 that can be imagined, ferved to renew in Mils 
 Betfy, the next morning, thole anxieties, which, 
 fleep had, in fome meaiure, abated. 
 
 A ballad-finger happening to be in the ftreet, 
 the firll; thing Ihe heard, on her waking, was 
 thefe words, lung in a fonorous voice, juft under 
 her window : 
 
 * Young Philander woo'd me long, 
 *I was pee villi, and forbad him 5 
 
 * I would not hear his charming fong^ 
 * But now I wi(h, I wifh I had him.' 
 
 Though this was a fong at that time much in 
 vogue, and Mifs Betfy had cafually heard it an 
 hundred times, yet in the humour Ihe now was^ 
 
 it beat an alarm upon her heart, j It reminded 
 
 her how inconfiderate Hie had been, and fliewed 
 the folly of nor knowing how to place a juft value 
 on any thing, 'till it was loft, in fuch Itrong co- 
 lours before her eyes, as one would Icarce think 
 it poiTible, an incident iw itfelf lb merely bagatelle 
 could have produced. 
 
 Again (he fell into very deep refveries, and di- 
 vefting herfelf of all pariion, pride;, and the pre- 
 judice her vanity had but too much inlpired her 
 with, fhe found, that tlunigh Mr. Tru?worth 
 had carried his refentment further than became a 
 man, who loved to that degree, as he pretended 
 to have done 5 yet flie could no way jullify her- 
 ft\^ to her brother Frank, lady Trully, or any 
 of thofe friends, who had efpouled his caufe^ for 
 having given him the provocation. 
 
 To 
 

<#PG# 339>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 329 
 
 To heighten the fpleneric humour Hie was in, 
 Wr. Goodman, who having been taken up with 
 his own affiiiis, had not mentioned Mr. True- 
 worth to her for fome days, happened this morn- 
 ing, as they fat at breakfaft, to afk her how the 
 courtfliip of that gentleman went on, and whe- 
 ther there was like to be a wedding, or not ? — 
 Perceiving (lie bhifhed, — hung down her head, 
 and made no anfwer, — ' Nay, — nay,' — fa id he, 
 
 * I tahi you long ago I would not interfere in thefe 
 
 * matreis, and have le(s reafon now than ever to 
 
 * do lo, as your eldeil brother is in town, and 
 
 * who is doubtlefs capable of advifing you for the 
 
 * be ft.* - Mils Betly wa^ in a good deal ofcon- 
 fufion 5— Hie knew not as jer whether it would 
 be proper for her to acquaint Mr. Goodman with 
 what had pafTed between Mr. Trueworrh and her- 
 lelf, or to be filent on that head, 'till fFie (hould 
 lee what a little time might bring about. — As 
 file was thinking in what manner Ihe Aiould re- 
 ply, Mr. Goodman's lawyer, luckily for her re- 
 lief, came in, and put. an end to a difcourfe, 
 which, in the prefent fituation of her mind, flie 
 was very unfit to bear a part in. 
 
 But as if this was to be a day of continued ad- 
 monitions to Mifs Betfy, Hie was no fooner dreft, 
 and ready to quit her chamber, than fhe heard 
 Mifs Mabel's voice upon the llairs.— As that 
 young lady was not accuftomed to make her any 
 morning vifits, flie was a little furpriied 5 — (lie 
 ran however to meet her, faying, ' This is a fa- 
 
 * vour I did not expert, and therefore have the 
 
 * more caufe to thank you.' — ' I do not knov/,* 
 replied the other, as flie entered the room, ' whe- 
 Vther you will ihink I deferve thanks or not, 
 
 * when you hear the bufinefs that brought me 5 
 
 * for I aflure vou I ain come only to chide you.' — 
 *I think,' faid Mifs Betly, wuh a Egh, * that all 
 
 * the 
 

<#PG# 340>
530 ne HISTORY of 
 
 * the world taHes the liberty of doing lb with me 9 
 
 * bur, pray, my dear,' continued ilie, * how am 
 ' I io unhappy as to deierve it from you ?' 
 
 * Why > on. mud know,* replied Mifs Mabel. 
 
 * that I have taken upon me to be the champion 
 
 * of diitrefs'd love 3 — you have broken a fine 
 
 * gentleman's heart, and I am come to tell you, 
 
 * tnat you mufl either make it whole again, as it 
 ' was befoie he Ikw you, or repair the damage he 
 ' has fuftained by giving him your own.'— — ' I 
 
 * plead not guilty,' faid Mils Berfy, in a tone 
 fomewhat more fprighrly than bef<^re, ' but pray^^ 
 
 * who has gained io great an influence overyou 
 
 * as to fend you on io doughty an errand ?'*— ' No, 
 
 * my dear, jou are quite miftaken in the matter,* 
 replied the other, — * 1 afTure you I am not lent 
 
 * «— I am only led by my own generofity, and the 
 
 * fight of prK)r Mr. Trueworth's defpair.' ^ 
 
 ' Trueworrh,' cried MifsBetfy hallily, * What do 
 
 * yoli mean ?'— I mean,' replied the Other, * to 
 
 * engage you, if the litrle rhetoric I am mUlrels 
 
 * of can prevail on you to consider, that while w^ 
 
 * ufe a man oflenfe and honour ill, we doourfelves 
 
 * a real injury. — The love our beauty has inlpired, 
 
 * may, for a time, fecure our power, but it will 
 
 * grow weaker by degrees,and every little coquette- 
 
 * air we give ourl^lves, leflen the value of our 
 
 * charms.*— I know there is at prelent fome very 
 
 * great brulee between you and Mr. True worth ^ 
 ' — he is a match every way deferving af you,— - 
 
 * he has the approbation of all your friends, and 1 
 
 * have heard you acknowledge, you are not inleti-' 
 
 * fible of his merit ; to what end then do you ftudy 
 
 * to perplex and give unneceflary pain to a heart,. 
 
 * which you, according to all appearances, will 
 ^ one day take a pride in rendering happy ?' 
 
 * This is an extreme fine harangue, indeed,* 
 replied Mifs Betfy^ * but I would fain know for 
 
 '" what- 
 

<#PG# 341>
Mifs Betsy Tboughti^s&. g^x 
 
 * what reafon it is direfted to me 5 — if Mr. 
 
 * Trueworth imagines I have uled hini ill, I think 
 
 * it no proof of his undcrftanding, to make a pro- 
 ' chmatioiiof it 5— but, for heaven's lake, how 
 
 * came you to be the confidanre of his com- 
 ' plaints ?' 
 
 * Indeed I have not that honour/ faid Mifs 
 Mabel ^ ' finding mylelf'a lirtle \\\ this moi'ning, 
 
 * I thought the air would do me good, io went 
 
 * into the park, taking only a lirtle girl with me, 
 
 * who lives ar the next dour, becaufe I would not 
 ' go quite alone : being in the defhabille you iee, 
 
 * 1 croiicd the grafs, and was paiTmg towards the 
 
 * back of the bird-cige walk, where who Should I 
 
 * lee among the trees but Mr. Trueworth, if I may 
 
 * call the obje6l that tiien prelcnted itielf to me 
 
 * by that name 5 for indeed, mifs Betf^,', the poor 
 ' gentleman feems no more than the fhadow of 
 
 * himlelf — He faw me at a diftance, and I bc- 
 
 * lieve would have avoided me, bat perceiving 
 ^ my eyes were upon him, cleared up hiscounte- 
 
 * nance, as well as he was able, and accofled me 
 
 * with the ufual lalutations of the morning. — — 
 
 * It is fomewhat furprifing, madam,' laid he, 
 with an air of as much gallantry as he could af- 
 fume, ' to find a lady fojuitly entitled to the ad- 
 
 * miration of the world, as Mifs Mable is, fhun 
 
 * the gay company of the Mall, and choofe an 
 
 * unfrequented walk, like this.' * I might 
 
 •retort the fame exclamation of furprife,' replied 
 I, * at fo unexpedtedly meeting with Mr. True- 
 
 * worth here.* 
 
 ' After this, as you know, my dear,' continued 
 fhe, * I have lately, on your account, had the 
 
 * pleafure pretty often of Mr. Trueworth's com- 
 
 * pany, I took the liberty to afk him where he had 
 
 * buried himfelf, that I had not feen him for fo 
 
 * many days :'— to which be anfwered, not with- 
 
 out 
 

<#PG# 342>
332 ne HISTORY of 
 
 out a confufion, which I faw he attempted, tho*^ 
 in vain, to conceal from me. ^— * Yes, madam, 
 
 * 1 have indeed been buried from all pleafure, — ^ 
 
 * have been fwallowed up in affairs little lels tor- 
 
 * mentin;^ than thofe of the gi'ave 5 — bur,' added 
 he, ' they are now over, and I am preparing to- 
 
 * return to my country feat, where I hope to re- 
 
 * enjoy t'nat tranquility, which, fince my leaving 
 
 * it, has been pretty much difturbed.* 
 
 ' Nothing could equal my aftonifliment, at 
 
 * hearing him Ipeak in this manner:' * To 
 
 * your country leat !' cried I ^ * not to continue 
 
 * there for any long time!' — * I know not as 
 
 * yet, madam,' replied he, and then, after a paufe, 
 
 * perhaps for ever,' added he. ' Bleis me/ 
 
 faid I, 'this is flrange indeed, — Mifs Betfy did 
 
 * not tell n)e a word of it, and I law her but lail 
 'night.'- ' She might not then know it, ma-^ 
 
 * dam,' anlwered he 5 ' but if /he had, I am not 
 ' vain enough to imagine, fhe would think a 
 
 * trifle, fuch as my departure, worth the pains of 
 ' mentioning.' 
 
 . ' I then,' purfued Mifs Mabel, * endeavoured 
 
 * to rally him out of this humour. — - After having- 
 ' told him, I had a better opinion of your under- 
 
 * ftanding and generofity, than to be capable of 
 
 * believing you thought fo lightly of his friend- 
 
 * iliip and aftedion, I added, that this was only 
 
 * fome little pique between you, — fome jealous 
 ' whim 5 but he replied to all I laid on this fub- 
 
 * je<^ with a very grave air, pretended bulinels, 
 
 * and took his leave fomewhat abruptly, for a man 
 
 * of that poiiteneis, I had till now always obferved 
 
 * in him.' 
 
 * He carries it with a high hand, indeed,' cried 
 
 * mi(s Betfy ; — ' but it is no matter,.— I fhalt 
 
 * give mylelf no trouble whether he ftays in town, 
 
 * r— <^f whether he goes into the country, — or 
 
 ' whtiher 
 

<#PG# 343>
Mifs Bet5y Thoughtless. ^^^ 
 
 * whether I ever ice him more. — What ! — dues 
 
 * the man think to triumph over mc ?' 
 
 * I do not believe that is the cafe with Mr. 
 
 * Trueworth/ f'aid the difcreet Mils Mabel 5 ' but 
 
 * 1 know it is the way of many men to recriminate 
 
 * in this manner, — ■ and pray vvhen they do, who 
 ' can we blame for u but ourfelves in giving rhem 
 
 * the occafion ? — For my part, I ihojld thmk it 
 
 * an jffronr to myfelf to encourage the addrefTes 
 
 * of a perfon, I did nfit look upon worthy of being 
 
 * treateii with rel'pe(5t.' 
 
 She urged many arguments to convince Mils 
 Jjetl'y of the vanity and lil coniequences ot trifling 
 wi'h an honourable and fincere pailion, which rho* 
 no more than what that young lady had already 
 made ule c>f to herlelf, and was tully perluaded 
 in the taith of, Jhe was not very well plcaled to 
 he;{i f:oin rli-e mouch of another. 
 . 'i'hough the'e tuo ladies perfeflly agreed in 
 their ientinienrs of virrueand reputation, yet their 
 difpoliri'ms and behaviour in the affiirs of lov#» 
 were as widely diftt ^ent, as any two perlons po. 
 iibly could be 5 T- arid this it was, which during; 
 the courle of their acquaintance, gave frequent 
 interruptions to that harniony between them, which 
 the niutu;il elleem they had tor each other'.s good 
 qualities, would otherwise have rendered perpe- 
 tual. 
 
 CHAP. XLII. 
 
 Is multum in parvo. 
 
 ''T^HERE is an unaccountable pride in human 
 -*' nature, which often gets the bct:er of our 
 jnltice, and makes us elbouCe whst we know with- 
 in ouriclves is wrong, rather than appear to be let 
 llight by any reafon, except our own. 
 
 Mifs 
 

<#PG# 344>
334 ^Z-"? HISTORY cf 
 
 Mils Betfy had too much of this unhappy pro* 
 penfity in her compoliiion.— • A very little reflec- 
 tion enabled her to fee clearly enough the mil- 
 takes file fometimes fell into , but Ihe could net 
 bear they fhould be feen by others. — Mifs 
 Mabel was not only in effeft the moft valuable of 
 all the young ladies fhe converfed with, but was 
 alfo the molt elleemed and loved by her, yet was 
 /he lefs happy and delighted in her company, than 
 in that of feveral others, for whom her good fenfe 
 would not fufler her to have the lead real regard. 
 •— The truth is, that though Ihe was very well 
 convinced of her errors, in relation to thole men 
 who profeffed themfelves her admirers, yet flie 
 loved thole errors in herlelf,— thought they were 
 pretty, and became her 3— and therefore as Ibe 
 could not as yet refolve to alter her mode of be- 
 haviour, was never quite eafy in the preience 0^ 
 any one, who afled with a prudence ihe would 
 not be at the pains to imitate. 
 
 There were two young ladies, who had an a- 
 partment in the palace of St. James's, their father 
 having an office there, who exadlly fuired with 
 her in the mofi: volatile cjf her moments : — they 
 had wit, — fpirir, and were gay nlmofi: to wildnefs, ^ 
 without the l^ll mJAnire of hbertinifn», or in- 
 decency.— How perfr^dly innocent they were, is 
 not the bufinels ol thi:, biilory to diiculs, but they 
 preferved as good a reputation as their neighbours, 
 and were weii refpected in all public places. 
 
 There it was Mils Beify ciiiefly found an alylum 
 from thofe perplexing thoughis, which in fpite of . 
 her pride, and the indifference Ih.e had for man- 
 Icind, would fgnjetimes intrude upon her mind on 
 Mr. True worth's account 5 — here Ihe was certain 
 of meeting a great variety of company j — here : 
 was all the news and Icandal the town could fur-^ 
 nifii 5 — here v/as murick. — dancing, — fealling, ^ 
 
 flitreryj ; 
 

<#PG# 345>
Mifs Betsy Thouohtless. q^^^ 
 
 :Sattery 5 — in fine, here was every thing, that was 
 an enemy to care and contemplation. 
 
 Among the number of thole, who fill'd th« 
 circle of thefe two court belles, there was a gen- 
 tleman named Munden ; — he appeared extreme- 
 ly charmed with mifs Betfy at firfl fighr, and after 
 having informed himfelf of the particulars of her 
 family and fortune, took an opportunity, as he 
 was conducting her home one nighr, to inireat flie 
 would allow him to pay his refpeCts to her where 
 fhe lived. — This was a favour mifs Betfy was 
 never very fcrupulous of granting, and coniented 
 now the more readily, as ilie thought the report 
 of a new lover would gall Mr. Trueworrh^ who, 
 fhe heard by f >me, who had very lately feen him, 
 was not yet gone r)ut of town. 
 
 Mr. Munden, to reftrfy the impitience of his 
 love, waited on her the very next day, as f )on as 
 he thought dinner would be over, at Mr. Good- 
 man's : — he had the fatisfa6lion of finding her 
 alone 5 but fearing fhe might: not long be fo, fuf- 
 fered bur a very few minutes xo efcape before 
 he acquainted her with the errand on which he 
 camr:— -rhe terms in which he declared him- 
 felf her admirer, were as pathetic as could be 
 made ufe of for the purpofe^— but though this 
 was no more tlun iMils Betfy had expected, and 
 would have been ftrangely mortified if difappoint- 
 ed, by his entertaining her on any other Icore, yet 
 /he afifefied, at firft, to treat it with furprife, and 
 then, on his renewing his protellations, to anfwer 
 all he iaid with a fort of raillery, m order to put 
 him to the more expence of oarhs and afleverati- 
 ons. 
 
 It is cerrain, that whoever pretended to make 
 his addrefles to Mifs Berfy, flood in need of being 
 .previoufly provided with a good flock of repar- 
 tees^ to fii ence the farcafms of the witty fair, as 
 
 well 
 

<#PG# 346>
S36 The HISTORY of 
 
 we]] as fir»e fpeeches to engage her to more feri- 
 oufnefi. — Mr. Munden often found himfejf at his 
 ne plus ultra, but was not in the lealt difconcert- 
 ed at it 5— he was a courtier 3 — he was accul- 
 tomed to attend at the levees of the great, and 
 knew very well, that perions in power feldom 
 failed to exercife it over thofe, who had any de- 
 pendance on them 5 and looj^ing on the cafe of a 
 lover with his miftrels, as the lame with one who 
 is folicitins; for a penfion, or employment, had 
 armed himlelf with patience, to lubmit to every 
 thing his tyrant ihould inflict, in the hope, that it 
 would one <lay be his turn to impole laws, — ac- 
 cording to the poet's words : 
 
 * The humbleil: lover, when he lowefl lie.c, 
 ' But kneels to conquer, and but fills to rile.* 
 Mifs Betfy was indeed a tyrant, bur a very gen- 
 tle one 5 Ihe always mingled fome fweet with the 
 fliarpneis of her exprcffions : — if in one brcarh 
 flic menaced deipair, in the nexr /]i« encouraged 
 hope, and iier very repuKes were fometimeji ib 
 equivocal, as that they might be taken for invi- 
 tations ^— (lie played with her lovets, as /he did 
 with her monkey, but expedled more obedience 
 from them 5 — they nuitl look gay or giave, ac- 
 cording as ihe did fo 3 — their humour, and even 
 their very motions mail be regulated by her in- 
 fluence, as the waters by the moon : — in fine, 
 an exterior homage was the chief thing to be re- 
 quired 5 for as 10 the heart, her own being yet 
 untouched, ihe 9^c\vq herfelf bnt little trouble 
 how that of her lovers i'tood affeded. 
 
 Mr. Munden, with lefs love, perhaps, than 
 many, who had arldreffed her, knew' better how 
 to luit himlelf to her humour 5 — he could a6l 
 over all the delicacies of the mod tender paffion, 
 without being truly lenfible of any of them, nnd 
 ihough he wijiied, in reaJity, nothing fo much as 
 
 attaining 
 

<#PG# 347>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 337 
 
 attaining the affeftions of mifs Betfy, yetwifhing 
 it without thofe timid inquietudes, -— thofe jealous 
 doubts, — thofe perplexing anxieties, which fuf- 
 ]3enfe inflidls on a more folid mind, he was the 
 more capable of behaving towards her in the way 
 fhe hked. 
 
 ■ He was continually inviting her to fome party 
 of pleafure or other, — he gallanted her to all 
 public Hiews, — he treated her with the moft ex- 
 quifite dainties of the Icafon, and pierenied her 
 with many curious toys. — Being to go with thefe 
 ladies, at whofe appointment he firft commenced 
 his acquaintance with her, and fome other com- 
 pany to a mafquerade, he waited on her fo:ne 
 hours before the time, and taking out of his pocket 
 a ruby, cut in the fhape of a heart, and illuf- 
 ^rated with fmall brilliants round about, — '[ 
 
 * beg, madam,* faid he, * you will do me the ho- 
 
 * nour of wearing this to night, either on your 
 
 * fleeve, or breaft, or fome other <:onfpiaK>us 
 
 * place. — There will be a great deal of company, 
 
 * and Ibme perhaps in the lame habit as yourfelf, 
 
 * — this will direct my fearch, prevent my being 
 
 * deceived by appearances, which otherwife I 
 
 * might be, and prophanely pay my worfliip to 
 
 * f )me other, inftead of the real goddefs of my 
 
 * foul.; 
 
 This was the method he took to ingratiate him- 
 felf into the favour of his miftrefs, and it had the 
 effefl, if not to make her love him, at leafl to 
 mAke her charmed with this new conqueil, much 
 more than fhe had been with fevcral of her former 
 ones, though never fo much deferving her ef^ 
 teem. 
 
 . In the midfl of thefe gay fcenes, however, Mr, 
 Trueworth came frequently into her head. — To 
 fTnd he was in town,made her flatterherfelf, that he 
 liixgered here on her account, aiid that, in fpite 
 
 Vol. I. Q. of 
 

<#PG# 348>
3^8 ne HISTORY of 
 
 of all his refolution, he had not courage to leave 
 the fame air ilie breathed in 5 — /he fancied, that 
 if fhe could meet him, or any accident throw him 
 in her way, flie fhould be able to rekindle all bis 
 former flames, and render him as much her flave 
 as ever.— With this view fhe never went abroad 
 without carting her eyes about, in fearch of him 5 
 •?— nay Ihe fometimes even condefcended to pal^ 
 by the houfe where he was Jodgcd, in hopes of 
 feeing him either ooing in or out, or from fbme 
 one or other of the windows 3 but chance did not 
 befriend her inclinations this way, nor put it in 
 her power again to triumph over a heart, the fin- 
 cerity of which fhe had but too ill treated, when 
 devoted to her. 
 
 In the mean time Mr. Goodman, in fpite of 
 the perplexities his own affairs involved him in, 
 could not help feeling a great concern forthofe of 
 ini(s Betfy j — - he knew that Mr. Trueworth had 
 defilted his vifits to her, — that flie had got a new 
 lover, who he could not find had confulred the 
 permiflion of any one but herfeif, to make his 
 addrefles to her .5 — the late hours fhe kept, fel- 
 dom coming home *till fonie hours after the whole 
 family, except the fervant who iate up for her, 
 were in bed, gave hmi alfo much matter of unea- 
 finels, and he thought it his duty to talk ferioufly 
 to her on all thefe points. 
 
 He began with afking her, how it happened 
 that he had not feen Mr. Trueworth for io long a 
 time ? To which (lie replied, with the utmoft 
 indifterence, that fhe took i'omt things ill from 
 
 that gentleman, and that, perhaps, he might have 
 Ibme lubjedl of complaint againlt her, — * There- 
 
 * fore,* laid flie, * as our humours did not 
 
 * well agree, it wasbeli: to break offconverfai 
 
 He then queftioned her concerning Mr. J 
 den 3 — * I hope/ laid he, * you have taken 
 
 care 
 'to 
 

<#PG# 349>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 33^9 
 
 • to inform yourfelf as to his character and cir- 
 
 • cumftances.' — * No truly, fir,* anfwered /he, 
 with the fame carelefs air as before, * as I never 
 
 • intend to be the better or the worfe for either, I 
 
 • give myfelf no pain about what he is.' — Mr. 
 Goodman /hook his head, and was going to rea- 
 fon with her, on the ill confequences of fuch a 
 behaviour, when fome company coming in, broke 
 ofF, for a time, all further difcourfe between them. 
 
 CHAP. XLIir. 
 
 She--vcs MJs "Betfy left entirely to her own ma- 
 ffagemonty and the caufe of it, with fome other 
 particulars, 
 
 MR. Goodman, who had^ been a little vexed 
 at being interrupted, in the remonftrances 
 he thought fo highly necefiary /liould be made 
 to Mifs Betfy, took an opportunity of renewing. 
 them the next morning, in the ilronge/t exprei- 
 iions he was mafter of 
 
 Mifs Betfy, with all her wit, had little to fay 
 for hcrfelf, in anfwer to the fcrious harangue 
 made to her by Mr. Goodman, on her prelent 
 fefhion of behaviour 5— her heart avowed the 
 jiiftice of his reproofs, but her humour, too tena- 
 cious of what pleal'ed itfelf, and too impatient of 
 -eontroul, would not fuffer her to obey the dictates 
 
 either of his or her own reafon. • She knew 
 
 very well the tender regard he had for her, on the 
 account of her deceafed father, and that all he 
 fpoke was calculated for her good 3 but then it 
 was a good /he was not at prefent ambitious of 
 attaining, and thought it the privilege of youthto 
 do whatever it lifted, provided the rules of virtire 
 were unfringed, fo that all that he could get 
 -kom her was, — that her amufemcnts were in'no- 
 Q_2 cent,. 
 

<#PG# 350>
340 ne HISTORY of 
 
 cent, — that fhe meant no harm in any thing fh& 
 did, — that it was dull for her to fit at honve 
 alone, and when in company could not^uitjt 
 abruptly, on any confideration of hours. 
 
 Mr. Goodman found, that to bring her to ,a- 
 more jaft fenle of what was really her advantage, 
 would be a tafk impoffible for him to accomplifli, 
 and began heartily to wifh fhe were under the- 
 care of fome perlon, who had more leifure to 
 argue with her, on points io eflential to her hap- 
 pinels : — • he told her, that he indeed had feared 
 his houfe would be too melancholly a recefs for 
 her, since the revolution that had lately happened 
 in his family, and therefore wifhed fome mo?e 
 proper place could be found for her 5 — * And 
 
 * for fuch a one,' laid he, * I fiiall make it my bu- 
 
 * finefs to enquire, -i- and there feenis not only- a 
 
 * neccffity for my doing fo, but that you iLouid 
 
 * alfo choofe another guardian 3 for as loon as the 
 
 * preient unlucky buiinefs I am engaged in fliall 
 
 * be over, it is my reiolution to break up houle- 
 
 * keeping, — leave my buiinels to my nephe\y', 
 
 * Ned Goodman, whom I expeci by the firft fhip 
 
 * that arrives from the Eaft indies, and, having- 
 
 * once leen him fettled, retire, and fpend the r^- 
 
 * mainder of my days inihe country.' 
 
 The melancholly accents with which Mr. 
 Goodman uttered thefe words, touched Mifs Bet- 
 ly very much 5 — fhe expreffed, in terms th« 
 moft affe^Honate, the deep concern it gave her, 
 that he had any caufe to withdraw from a way of 
 life, to which he had io long been accuftomed.5 
 but added, that if it muft be fo, fhe knew no per- 
 fon fb proper, in whole hands the little fortune 
 llie was miftrels of fliould be entrtifted, as thofe 
 of her brother Thoughtlels, if he would vouchfafe 
 to take that trouble upon him. 
 
 *There 
 

<#PG# 351>
Mfs Betsy Thoughtless. 541^ 
 
 ' There is no doubt to be made of that, I be- 
 
 * lieve,' replied Mr. Goodman,' * and I fhall /peak 
 
 * to him about it the firrt: time I lee him."— — 
 They had fome farther talk on Mifs Betfy's affairs, 
 and that young lady found, he had very largely 
 improved the portion bequeathed her by her fa- 
 ther J for which, in the firft emotions of her 
 gratitude, fhc was beginning to pour forth fuch' 
 acknowledgments, as he thought it too much ro 
 hear, and interrupted her, faying, he had done 
 no more, than his duty obliged him to do^ and 
 could not have anfwered to himielf the omif- 
 iion of any part of it. 
 
 It is fo natural for people to love money, even 
 before they know what to do with it, that it is not 
 to be wonaered at, that Mils Betly, now arrived 
 at an age capable of relifhing all the delicacies 
 of life, fhould be tranfported at finding fo con- 
 fiderable, and withal fo unexpeded, an augmen- 
 tation of her fortune, which was no lefs than one 
 third of what her father had left her. 
 
 The innate pleafure of her mind, on this occa- 
 fion, diffufed iifelf through all her form, and 
 gave a double lultre to her eyes and air, fo that Ihe 
 went with charms new pointed to a ball that night, 
 for which the obiequious Mr. Munden had pre- 
 fented her with a ticket ^ — but though flie had 
 all the refpedt in the world for Mr. Goodman, 
 and indeed a kind of filial love for him, yet flie 
 had it not in her power to pay that regard to his 
 admonitions (he ought to have done 5 — flic came 
 not home till between one and two o' clock in 
 the morning, but was extremely furprized to find, 
 that when flie did fo, the knocker was taken off 
 the door j a thing which, in complaifance to her, 
 had never before been done, till fhe came in,, 
 how late ibcver fhe rtayed abroad 5 — /lie was, 
 »e verthelefs, much more furpnfed, as well as 
 Q^ 3 troubled, 
 

<#PG# 352>
342 ne HISTORY 0/ 
 
 troubled, when on the firft rap her chairmen gave, 
 a footman, who waited in the hall for her return, 
 immediately opened the door, and told her, with 
 all the marks of forrow in his countenance, that 
 his maftcr had been fuddenly taken ill, and that 
 his phyfician, as well as Mrs. Barns, the houfe-: 
 keeper, had given, ftri6t orders there (hould be 
 no noife made in the houfe, the former having 
 faid his life depended on his being kept perfeftly 
 quiet. 
 
 It is not to be doubted, but that, on this infor- 
 mation, fhe went with as lirile noife as poffible 
 lip to her chamber, where Nanny, as ihe was. 
 putting her to bed, confirmed to her what the 
 footman had faid, and added, that Ihe had heard' 
 the dodor tell Mrs. Barns, as he was going our, 
 that he was very apprehenfive his patient's difor- 
 der would not be eafily removed. 
 
 Dillempers of the body, which arife from thole 
 of the mind, are mdeed much more difficult to 
 be cured, than thofe which proceed from meer 
 natural caufes. — Mr. Goodman's relentment for 
 the ill ufage he had fuftained, from a woman he 
 had fo tenderly loved, awhile kept up his fpirits, 
 and hindered him from feeling the cruel iling, 
 which preyed upon his vitals, and inienfibly 
 flackened the firings of life 5 but the firft hurry 
 being over, and the lawyer having told him, that 
 every thing was drawn up, and his caule would 
 be brought before the commons in a few days, he 
 funk beneath the apprehenfions, — - the thoughts 
 of appearing befcre the do(51:ors of the civil law, to 
 leveral of whom he was known, to prove his own 
 difhonour, — the talk of the town, — the whifpers, 
 — the grimaces, — the ridicule, which he wasfen- 
 fible this affair would occafion whenexpofed, — the 
 pity of lome, — and the contempt he muif expedl 
 from others 3 •*• all thefe things, though little re- 
 garded 
 

<#PG# 353>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 343- 
 
 garded by him while at a diftance, now they came 
 more near at hand, and juft ready to fall upon him, 
 gave him fuch a fhock, as all the courage he had 
 afTumed was not liifficient to enable him to refift. 
 
 He was feized at once with a violent fit of an 
 apoplexy at a coffee-houie, where a furgeon being 
 immediately fent for, he was let blood, as is com-i 
 mon in fuch cales. — This operation Ibon reco- 
 vered him, fo far as fpeech and motion, but rea- 
 fon had not power to reafTume her leat in his dif* 
 ordered brain, for many hours j — he was brought 
 home in a chair, — the furgeon attended him^-^ 
 law him put into bed, and fat by him a conlider- 
 able time, but fiiKling him rather worfe than 
 better, told Mrs. Barns, he durft not proceed any 
 further, and that they muft have recourfe to a 
 phyiician, which was accordingly done. 
 
 This gentleman, who was eileemed the moffc 
 ftilful of his profeffion, hearing Mr. Goodman 
 frequently cry our, * My heart ! — my heart I' 
 laid his hand upon his bofom, and found, bv the 
 extraordinary puliation there, that he had fvmp- 
 toms of an inward convui(i(m, wrote a prefcripri- 
 on, and ordered he fhould be kept extremely 
 quiet. 
 
 Towards morning he grew more compofed, 
 and by degrees recovered the ufe of his under- 
 ftandmg as perfeflly as ever, bur his limbs were' 
 fo much weakened by that fevere attack the £c' 
 had m.^de upon him, that he could not fir up in 
 his bed without uipport.— The phyiician, how- 
 ever, at his next vilit, had great hopes of him/ 
 
 — faid his imbecility proceeded only from a fe- 
 ver of the nerves, which he doubted not but to 
 abite, and that he would be well m a few days* 
 
 — How uncertain, --iiow little to be depended 
 upon is art, in fome cafes ! — Mr. Goodman felt 
 that within himlelf, which gave the lie to all ap-i 
 
 pearances. 
 

<#PG# 354>
344 77^^ HISTORY of 
 
 pearances, and fully convinced that the hand of 
 death had feizcd upon his heart, would not defer- 
 a moment putting all his affairs in fuch a pofturej 
 as fhould leave no room for contention among the- 
 parties concerned, after his deceafe : — he began 
 with fending for Mr. Thoughtlels, and configned* 
 over to him the whole fortunes of Mr. Francis^ 
 and Mifs Betfy, the latter being firil obliged, as 
 not being yet of age, to chufe him for her guar- 
 dian in form. •»• Having thus acquitted himfelfjf 
 in the moft honourable manner, of the truil re*» 
 pofed in him, for the children of his friend, he 
 confidered what was beft to be done, in relatiort 
 to thofe of his own blood.— By his death, the 
 intended procefs againft lady Mellafin would be 
 prevented, and confequently the third part of his 
 efifefis would devolve on her, as being the widow 
 of a citizen j—- he, therefore, having confulted 
 with his lawyer, if i'uch a thing were praflicable, 
 made a ^^^^ of gift to his nephew, Mr. Edward 
 Goodman, of all his money in the bank, ftocks, 
 and other public funds. — After this, he made- 
 his will, and the lawyer perceiving he had left but 
 few legacies, afked him, how the refidueot what he^ 
 is poflefled of fhould be difpofed 5 to which he» 
 replied, * Greatly as 1 have been wronged by 
 
 * lady Mellafin, I would not have her to ftarve :: 
 « — I have been calculating in my mind to what 
 
 * her dividend may amount, and believe it will 
 
 * be fufficient to enable her to live in that retired 
 
 * manner, which beft becomes her age and cha- 
 
 * raaer.' 
 
 Mr. Goodman, having thus fettled all his af- 
 fairs in this world, began to make fuch prepa- 
 tions for another, as are neceflary for the beft of 
 men. — In the mean time, as the leaft noife was 
 difturbing to him, it was judged proper that Mifs 
 JBetfy, who could not live without company, 
 
 ihouid 
 

<#PG# 355>
Mfs Betsv ThoughtlessT '345 
 
 /hould remove. — No boarding-place to her mind 
 being yet found, and having dune with all hopes 
 of living with her brother, (ss fhe was by this 
 time informed of the true reafons he had for her 
 not doing fo,) took lodgings in Jermyn-ftreer, 
 and finding the intere^ of her fortune,^ through 
 >Iie good management of her late guardian, would 
 allow it, hired a maid and foot boy to wait up^n 
 her. 
 
 The adieu fhe received from Mr. Gooihnan 
 was the molt tender and afFedionate that could 
 be 5— fhe was very much moved with ir, and 
 fincerely lamented the lols (he fliould fultam of 
 fo honeit and worthy a friend 5 but her natural 
 iprightlinels would not fulftr any melancholly re- 
 flections to dwell long upon her mind, and the 
 hurry ihe was in of lending meflages to all her 
 acquaintance, with an account of the change of 
 her fituation, very much ccnitributed to diflipate 
 them. — This important bufinefs was fcc»rc€ 
 over, and Die well fettled in her new habitation, 
 when one of Mr. Goodman's footmen brought her 
 a letter from her brother Frank, which had bceti 
 juft left for her by the pod. -—It contained thele 
 lines : 
 
 To Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 
 
 * My dear fijie}\ 
 
 * I HAVE been fnatched from the brink of the 
 ** •■• grave, by the (kill of one of the beft phyfici- 
 
 * ans in the world, and the tender, and, I may 
 
 * fay, maternal care of our moft dear, and truly 
 
 * valuable friend, the excellent lady Truity. 
 
 * The firfl ufe I made of my recovered health, is 
 
 * to give an account of it to thofe, whom, I flat- 
 
 * ter mylelf, will be obliged by the intelligence. 
 
 * ——I thank you for the many kind wiAies you 
 
 * have 
 

<#PG# 356>
'346 Tbe HISTORY of 
 
 * have fent me, during the courfe of my illncff^. 
 *but hoped to have feen, before now, another 
 
 * name fubfcribed to your letters, than that you- 
 •received from your birth 5 and cannot help lay- 
 
 * ing, I am a little furprifed, that in the two laft 
 
 * you favoured me with, you have been entirely 
 
 * filent on a fubjeft you know I have always had 
 
 * very much at heart. — I have alfo very lately 
 
 * received a letter from Mr. Trueworth, wherein 
 
 * he tells me, he is going to his country feat, — r^^ 
 
 * exprefTes the mofl kind concern for me, but 
 
 * mentions not the leaft fyllable of you, or of his 
 
 * paflion.— — I fear, my dear fifler, there is fomtr 
 
 * mifunderftanding between you, which would 
 
 * very much trouble me, for your fake efpccially, 
 
 * but I /hall defer what I have to fay to you, till' 
 ' I have the pleafure of feeing you.—— I am not 
 
 * yet judged fit ro fit my horfe for fo long ajour- 
 
 * ney, and the places in the ftage-eoaeh are aH 
 
 * taken for to-morrow, but have fecured one in 
 
 * Thurfday*s coach, and expecl to be with you oti 
 
 * Saturday.— I accompany this to you with orre 
 
 * to my brother, and another to Mr. Goodman, fo 
 
 * have no occafion to trouble you with my com- 
 
 * pliments to either.—— Farewell. • I think L 
 
 •'need not tell you, that I am, 
 
 * With an unfeigned regard, 
 * My dear fifter, 
 *\Your very affectionate brother, 
 
 * And humble fervant, 
 
 * F, Thoughtless:*' 
 
 P. S. Sir Ralph and^ lady Trufty are both front 
 home at this time, or I am certain their good 
 wifhes, if no more, would have joined mine',, 
 that you may never ceafe to enjoy whatever it 
 becomes you to defire. — My dear Betfy, 
 adieu** 
 
 The 
 

<#PG# 357>
Mfs Betsy Thoughtless. 347 
 
 The joy, which this letter would have afforded 
 Mifs Betfy had been compleat, if nor Tomewhat 
 abated by the apprehenfions of what her brother 
 would fay to her, when he fhouid find fhe was 
 indeed intirely broke off with Mr. Trueworth 5 
 but as the reader may probably defire to know ia 
 what manner he p^ls'd his time after that event, 
 and the motives which induced him to Hay in 
 London, it is now highly proper to fay fbmething 
 of both. 
 
 CHAP. XLIV. 
 
 7'lje author is under feme apprehenfions^ ivill not 
 be quire pleafing to the humour of every reader, 
 
 IT is certain that Mr. Trueworth, at the time of 
 his vvi'iting his laft letter to Mi(s Betfy, was ful- 
 ly determined to go into the country, and was 
 already beginning to make luch preparations, as 
 he found neceffary for his journey, when an acci- 
 dent of a very fingular nature put a fudden flop to 
 them, and to his intentic/ns. 
 
 He wa£ one da\ juft dreffed, and going out, in 
 order to dine with lome company, for be now 
 ch(»fe to be as little alone as poffible, when one of 
 his ferv:ints delivered a letter to him, which he 
 faid was brought by a porter, who waited below 
 for an anfwer. — As the fuperfcription was in a 
 woman's hmd, and he was not accutlomed to re- 
 ceive any billets from that fex, he broke it open, 
 wirh a kind of greedy curioiity, and found m it 
 thefe lines ; 
 
 To Charles Trueworth, Efq; 
 /Sir, 
 
 * T Am a woman of fortune, family, and an un- 
 
 * * blemifhed charader, — » very young, and moft 
 
 * people 
 

<#PG# 358>
54? "The HISTORY of 
 
 people allow not difagreeable : — ^i you have 
 done me the greatefl injury in the world with- 
 out knowing it 5 biic I take you to be more a 
 man of honour, than not to be willing to make 
 what reparation is in your power. — If the good 
 opinion I have of you does not deceive me, you 
 will readily accept this challenge, and not fail 
 to nieet me about eleven o'clock to-morrow in 
 the morning, at General Tatton's bench, oppo- 
 Ute Rofamond's Pond, in St. James's Park, —— 
 there to hear fuch interrogatories as I fliall think 
 fit to make you, and on your fincere anfwcr to 
 which, depends the whole future peace, if not 
 the life of her, who at prefenr, can only fub- 
 icribe herielf, 
 
 * In the greatefl confufion, 
 * Sir, 
 * Your unfortunate, 
 
 * And impatient 
 
 * Incognita.* 
 
 Mr. Trueworth was a good deal furpri^ed, but 
 had no occafion to confult long with himfelf in 
 what manner it would become a man of hjsyeac^ 
 to behave in fuch an adventure, and therefore faLjt 
 down and immediately wrote an anlwer in theff 
 terms : 
 
 To the fair Incognita. 
 
 < ^X^HOUGH a challenge from an unknown anr 
 
 * * ragonift might be rejected without any dan- 
 
 * ger of incurring the imputation of cowardife 5 
 
 * and, befides, as the combat to which I am in- 
 
 * vited is to be that of words, in which your fex 
 
 * are generally allowed to excel, I have not any 
 
 * foit of chance for overcoming j yet to /hew that j 
 
 * I dare 
 

<#PG# 359>
A^ifs Betsy Thoughtless. 345 
 
 * I dare encounter a fine woman at any weapon, 
 
 * and (hall not repine at being foiled, will not 
 
 * fill to give you the triumph you defire, and to 
 ' that end will wait on you exadly at the time 
 
 * and place mentioned in yours, — till when you 
 
 * may reft fatii-fied that I am, 
 
 * With the greateft impatience, 
 *The obliging Incognita's 
 
 * Mod devoted fervanr, 
 
 * C. Trueworth7 
 
 Though Mr. Truewortli had not only heard of, 
 but alfo experienced, when on his travels abroad, 
 fome adventures of a parallel nature with this, 
 yet as it never had entred into his head, that the 
 Englidi ladies took this method of introducing 
 themfelves to the acquaintance of thofe they were 
 pleafed to favour, the challenge of the incognita, 
 
 — who (lie was,— -where (he had feen him, 
 
 — what particular adion of his had merited her 
 good graces, and a thoufand other conjei'^ures, all' 
 rending to the fime objecl, very m.uch engroiTed 
 l)is mind. — Indeed he was glad to jrncourage 
 any thoughts, which ferved to drive thofe of Mifs 
 Bcrl'y thence, whofe idea, in fpitc of all his en- 
 deavours, and her luppo(ed unwonhinefs, wouW 
 f*)metimes intervene, and poifon the fweets of 
 his moll jovial moments among his frienc^s. 
 
 His curiofiry, for it canm)t be faid he was as yet: 
 inftigated by a warmer palTion, rendered him how- 
 ever very careful not to luffer the hour mentioned 
 in the lady's letter to elcape 5 but though he was 
 at the place fomewhat before the time, (he was 
 the firft, and already waited his approach.— As 
 he turned by the corner of the pond, he beijan to 
 reflefl, that as flie had given him no fional, 
 whereby (lie might be known, he might poiTiblv 
 
 Vot. I. K miftakc 
 

<#PG# 360>
350 "The HISTORY 5/ j 
 
 milUke for his Incognita fome other, whom 
 chance migiuhave aiieded to the bench, and was 
 iomewhat \x d his how to accolt her, in fuch a 
 manner, as that the compliment might not make 
 him be looked upon as rude or mad, by a perfbn 
 who hacl no reaion to expeflit from him. 
 
 But the lady, who, it is likely, was alfo fenfi- 
 blc ihe had been a little wanting in this part of j 
 the aflignation, loon ealed him of the fufpence he 
 Vvas m, by rifing from her feat, as he drew near, ' 
 ;jnd fainting him with thefe words,— ' How per- 
 
 * fe611y obliging,' faid fhe, ' is this punfluality -? 
 
 * —— It almolt flatters me I fliall ha\ e no rea(bn 
 
 * to repent the ftep I have taken.'——' A pt-rlbn 
 
 * who is injured,' replied Mr. Trueworth, ' has 
 
 * doubtlefs a right to complain j and if I have, 
 
 * though never i'o unwarily, been guilty of any 
 
 * wrong, cannot be too haity, nor too zealous in 
 
 * the rcpararion 5— -be pleafed therefore, ma- 
 
 * dam, to let me know the nature of my offence., 
 
 * and be afTured, that the wiflies of iiiy whote 
 
 * heart fliall be to expiate it. 
 
 * In concluding thele words, one of her gloves 
 being off, he took hold of her hand, and k\h\\ it 
 with either a real, or a feeming warmth. — ' Take 
 
 * care what you fay,' cried fhe, * left I exi^Q 
 *. more from you, than is in your power to per- 
 ' form 5 but let us fit down,' puriued flie, ll.flTer- 
 ing him flill to keep her hand in his, ' and be- 
 
 * gin to fulfil the promife you have made, 
 
 * by fatisfying me in fome few points 1 have to alk, 
 
 * with the fame fincerity as you would anlwer 
 
 * heaven.' — * Be affured I will,' faid he, put- 
 ting her hand a fecond time to his mouth, * and 
 
 * this fl:iall be the book on which I will fwear to 
 
 * every article.' 
 
 * Firft then,' demanded (he, * Are you mar- 
 
 * fied, orconfaded?* — * Neither, by all that's 
 

<#PG# 361>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. ^51 
 
 •■ de.1r,' faid he. — * Have you no artachmenr/' 
 relumed /he, * to any particular lady, that /hould 
 hinder your engaging with another?'—' Not 
 
 * any upon my honour,' anlwered he. 
 
 I fhould before now have acquainted my read- 
 er, that the lady was not only niafqued, buralfa 
 clofe mufled in her hood, that Mr.Trueworth 
 could difcover no part even of the fide of her face', 
 which, growing weary of this examination, he 
 took an opportunity to complain of——' Why 
 ' this tmkind relerve, my charming Incognita V 
 ikid he, * I have heard of penitents, who, while 
 *" confeiTing crimes they wtre afliamed of, kept 
 
 * their fices hid, but I believe there never was a 
 
 * confe{r)r who concealed himfelf, — permit me 
 ■ to r<»e to whom I am laying open my heart, and 
 
 * I fhall do ir with pleafurc.' — * That cannot be,* 
 ^nflvered (he, ' even for the vcryreafon you have 
 
 * alledged ; — I have fomerhing to confeis to you, 
 ' would fink me into the earth with /hame, did 
 ^ you behold the mouth that utters ir. — In fine, 
 
 * I love you, and after having told you fo, can 
 ^ you expedi I will reveal mylelf * Elfe 
 
 * bow can I return the bounry as I ought,' cried 
 he, * or you be aiTured you have not l^viih.ed your 
 ' favours on an infenfible or ungrateful heart ? 
 
 * Time may do much,* faid fhe'^— ^' a longer 
 
 * and more free converfation with you may per- 
 ' haps embolden me to make a full difcovery of 
 
 * my face to you, as I have already done of my 
 
 * heart.*— — Mr. Trueworth then told her, that 
 the place they were in would allow but very few 
 freedoms, and added, that if he were reaily la 
 happy as ih^ flattered him he was, /lie nui(t per- 
 mit him to wait on her, where he mioht have an 
 opportunity of teftifying the fenie he iiad of fo 
 unhoped, and as yet fo unmerited a biefling. 
 
 R z Alasl' 
 

<#PG# 362>
352 ne HISTORY of 
 
 * Alas !* cried flie, * I am quite a novice in a(^ 
 
 * fignarions of this fort,— I have fb entire a de- 
 
 * pendance on your honour, that I date meet yoii 
 
 * any where, provided you give me your folemri 
 
 * promife not to take any meafiires for knowing 
 
 * who I am, nor make any attempts to oblige me 
 
 * to unmafk, till I have afifumed couraoe enough 
 
 * to become vifible of my own free will.* 
 
 Mr. Trueworih rt-adily enough gave her the 
 promife flie exa£led from him, not at all doubt- 
 ing but he /hould be eslily able to find means to 
 engage her conlent for the fitisfa(5iion of his cu- 
 fioIi.y» in thefe points. — ' Well then,' faid flie, 
 
 * it belongs to you to name a place proper for 
 *■ thcfe fecier interviews.' 
 
 On this, after a little paufe, he anfwered, that 
 fince Hie judged it inconvenient for him to wait 
 upon her at home, or any other place where (lie 
 was known, he would be about the clofe of day 
 at a certain cofFee-houfe, which he named to her. 
 — * Where,' continued he, * I will attend your 
 
 * commands, and on your condefcending to flop 
 ' at the door in a hackney coach, will immediate- 
 
 * ly come forth, aiid condu<51 you to a houfe lecure 
 
 * from all danger of difcovery.' — ' She hefi- 
 tated not a moment to comply with his propolal, 
 yet m the fame breath flie did io^ aftecled to be 
 under lome fears, which before /he had not 
 
 made the leaft fhe w of ^' laid, * /he hoped he 
 
 would not abufe the confidence /he repofed in 
 him,— that he would take no advantage of rhei 
 weaknefs flie had fliewn, — that though /he loved 
 him with the mofl tender paffion, and could not 
 have live^i without revealing it to him, yet her 
 inclinations were innocent, and pure as thofc of a 
 veflal virgin, and a great deal more fluff of the 
 like fort, which though Mr. Trueworth could 
 Icarce refrain from fmiling at, yet he anfwered 
 
 wit 
 

<#PG# 363>
Al^ijs Betsy Thoughtless. 353 
 
 with all the ferioufnefs imaginahle, — * I /lion LI 
 
 * be unworthy, madam, of the affei^Hon you ho- 
 
 * nour me with,* faid he, ' were I capable ofafl- 
 
 * ing towards you in any manner unbecoming of 
 
 * you, or of niylelf^ and you may depend I ihall 
 
 * endeavour fo regulate my delires, lu as to ren- 
 
 * der them agreeable to yours.* 
 
 After (bme further dilcourle of rlie like naruie, 
 (he role up, and took her leave, infillini' at part- 
 ing, that he fhould not attempt to follow her, or 
 take any method to find out what way Hie went f 
 which injun<5tion he pun^ually obeyed, not Ww^ 
 ing from the bench, *till ihe v/as quite out oF 
 
 This adventure prodigioufly amufed him ;■ 
 never, in his whole life, had he met with any 
 thing he knew lo little how to judge of— — -She 
 had nothing of the air of a wornau of the town, 
 and befides, he knew it was not the intereft of 
 thofe wiio made a trade .uf their favours, to dil- 
 penfe them in the manner llie fcemed to intend ^ 
 -^ nor could he think her a perfon of the condi- 
 tion and charaftcr her hfter intiniated. He couhl 
 not conceive, that any of th(ire he was acquainted 
 with, would run fuch lengths for the gratification 
 of their pafiicn, elpecially for a man, who had 
 not taken the ler.ft pains to infpire it. — Some- 
 times he imagined it was a trick put upon him, in 
 order to make trial how far his vanity would ex- 
 tend in binllmg of it j— rt even came into his 
 head, that Mils lietiy lierfelf might get Ibmebody 
 to pfrlonate the amorous Incognita, for no other 
 putpole than to divert heriejf, and difappoint 
 his high railed expcclation ; but this lall conjec- 
 ture dwelt not long upon him : — he had heard 
 /lie now entertained another lover, with whom 
 ilie was very much taken up, and; confequently, 
 would not give herlelf io nuich trouble about 
 R Q one. 
 

<#PG# 364>
354 "The HISTORY of 
 
 one, who had entirely quitted her. In fine, 
 
 he knew not what to think, as he could not tell 
 how ro believe he had made luch an inipreiTion 
 upon any wcman^ without knowing it, as the In- 
 cognita prerenc^ed, he was apt to imagine he 
 ihould neither fee nor hear any more of her.—' 
 This uncertainry, however, emplojed his mind 
 the whole day, and he was no lels impatient for 
 the proof, than he would have been, if actually 
 in love with his invifible miilrels. 
 
 Ti^.e winded for hour at lali arrived, and he 
 waited nor long before he was eafed of one part 
 of his fnfpence, by being told, a lady in a hack- 
 ney coach enquired for him : — he was extremely 
 plealed to find, aujeali, he had not been impoled 
 upon, by a trick otany of his frolicklome compa- 
 nions, c^iid imnie(liately flew to the coach iide, 
 where feeing it was indeed his Incognita, he jump- 
 ed dire£l]y in, wiih a tranfport, which, doubtieis 
 was very/ agreeable to her. 
 
 Though he had often heard fome gentleman 
 fpeak of houfes, where two per ions of difterei^t 
 iexs might at any time be received, and have the 
 privilege of entertaining each other with all the 
 freedom and privacy they could defiie, yet as 
 he had never been accuftomed to intrigues uf this 
 nature, and thought he (liould have no cccafion 
 to make ufe of fuch places, he had not given him- 
 felf the trouble of afking where they might b« 
 found, therefore had now no other relource ihan 
 either a tavern or a bagnio, the latter of which 
 he looked upon, for moie realons than one, as 
 the moft commodious of the two, lo ordered the 
 coachmam to drive to one in Silver-ftieei j«— he 
 exculed hin^felf at the fame time to the lady, for 
 not having been able to provide a better aiylum 
 for her reception 5 but (he appeared ^erfedly 
 content, — told him, fhe had put herleif under 
 
 his 
 

<#PG# 365>
Mifi Betsy Thoughtless. 355 
 
 his care,^- relieci upon his honour and dilcretion, 
 — and left all to his dir€<^ion. 
 
 Being come into the bagnio, they were fiiewed 
 into a handfome large room, with a bed'-cb.am- 
 ber within it. — Mr. Trueworrh had his r^e on 
 every thing in an inftanr, and finding all v;ms 
 right, ordered a f upper to be prepared, and then 
 told the waiter, he would difpence with his atten- 
 dance, till it was ready.— A* loon as he found 
 hin\lelf alone with his Incognita, * Now, my an- 
 
 * gel,* laid h^, embracing her, * I liave an opnor- 
 
 * tnnity to thank yon for the affeftion you have 
 
 * flattered me with the hopes of, but at the lame 
 
 * time muft complain of !;e little proofs you give 
 
 * me of it • — rhe greatelt ftranger to your liemt 
 
 * would be allowed the privilege of a (alute, )ct 
 
 * I am denied the pleafure uf toucliing thole dear 
 Mips, which have denounced my happiijefs.*— •- 
 
 * l^o not reproach me,' anlweied /he, ' with 
 
 * denying what is not yet in my power to grjnt j. 
 
 * — I cannot let you lee my face, and you h..v« 
 
 * promiled nor to force me.' — * 1 have,' replied 
 he 'y * but that promile binds me not from in- 
 
 * dulging^ my impatient wilhes with things 30U 
 
 * have not Itipulaied : — your neck, your breafts 
 
 * are free, and thofe I will be revenged upon/— - 
 With rhcle words he took Ibme liberties with her, 
 which may better be conceived than defcribed j — 
 fhe but faintly, refilled, and, perhaps, would have 
 permuted him to take grearerthus maiVjued, but 
 the difcovery of her fjce was what he chiefly 
 wanted ^ ' You might, at leaft,' cried he, ' oblige 
 
 * me with a touch of thofe lovely lips, 1 am 
 
 * forbid to gaze upon 5- — here is a dark reccrfs,' 
 continued he, pointing to the inner room, * will 
 *,fave your blu/hes.'— — He then railed her from 
 the chair, and diav.ing her gentiy towards the 
 
 door, 
 

<#PG# 366>
35^ The HISTORY of 
 
 door, fung, in a very harmonious voice, this 
 flanza : 
 
 ' Away with this idle, this fcrupulous fear, 
 
 * For a ki(s in the dark, 
 
 * Cry*d the amorous fparl:, 
 
 ' There is nothing, no nothing too dear.' 
 Having led her into the chamber, and feated 
 her on the bed, which happened to be fo dii- 
 poied, that no gleam of light came upon it, from 
 the candles in the next room, — ' Now, my char- 
 ' mer,' faid he, taking hold of her mafk, ' you 
 
 * have no excufe for keeping on this inviduous 
 ' cloud.'——' How impoflible is it,' anfwered 
 (lie, letting it fall into his hand, * to refufe you- 
 
 * any thing !' 
 
 Vv'hat converfation after this pafled between 
 them, I fhall leave to the reader's imagination, 
 and only fay, that the voice of the Incognita be- 
 ing more diftingui/hable by the button of her 
 mafic being removed, Mr. Trueworth could not 
 help thinkinj^, he had heard before accents very 
 like ihcfe v^iih which he was new entertained, 
 though where, or from what mouth they had 
 proceeded, he was not able to reculle6^. 
 
 This conjedure, however, rendering him 
 more impatient than ever for the difcovery ^ he 
 omitred noihincf in his power, either by words or 
 acHons, to difTwade her from re-afTuming her 
 vizard, when they fhould quit the fcene of dark- 
 V'.^'is. — * How gladly would I comply,' cried fhe, 
 
 * but that I fear- — '.' 'Fear what!' cried Mr.: 
 Trueworth, eagerly interrupting her.'—— ' I fear 
 
 * to lole you,' replied fhe, fondly embracing him • 
 
 * — — my race is already but too well known to 
 
 * you 5 you have often feen it, but *itt\\ it with- 
 
 * out theie emotions 1 endeavour to infpire : — — 
 
 * how then can I now hope ir will have the efFcfl 
 
 * I wiih !' ~ Unkindly judged,' faid he, ' with 
 
 ^ what 
 

<#PG# 367>
Mifs Betsy Troughtless. 357 
 
 what indifTeience foever I may have regarded 
 you, the endearing foftneis, the enchanting 
 tranfports you have now blefled me with, 
 would give new charms to every fearure, and 
 mike me find perfe^ions I never law before. — — 
 Come then,' my goddefs,' continued he, raifing 
 her, * fhine with full liidie on me, 2nd fix me 
 
 your adorer.' '■ Well,' cried fl;e, ' vo^u are 
 
 not to be reliited, and I will venture.' 
 I'hefe words brought them to th.e chamber 
 door, and (liewed the Incognita to her amaaed 
 gallant, to he no other th.^n Mifs Flora. — ' M:fs 
 
 * flora Me 11 1 fin ! ■- ■ Good heavens!' cried he. 
 
 * • ■ You fce/n furprifed and Ihock'd,' faid {\\t -. 
 
 *■ * alas ! my apprehenfions were toojuil.'— • 
 
 * Pardon me, madam,' anfwered he, ' I am in- 
 
 * deed llirpriled, but it is through an excels of 
 
 * joy 5 — could I have ever th(»ught, the favours 
 
 * 1 have received were bellowed by the amiable 
 •Mils Flora Mellafin!' 
 
 It is certain, that his aftonifliment at firlt was 
 very great 5 but recovermg himfelf from it in a 
 fliorr time, a ihoufand paflages in Mils Flora's 
 former behaviour towards him occuned to his re- 
 membrance, and made hiin wonder at himfelf 
 for not having looner found her out, in the perfon 
 of his Incognita. —'— They pafled their time^ 
 till the night was pr«'tty fir advances), in a man- 
 ner very agreeable to each other, nor parted with- 
 out reciprocal alTurance of renewing this tender 
 io.tercourfe the next day, at the fame place,. 
 
 CHAP. 
 

<#PG# 368>
358 y*^ HISTORY 0/ 
 
 '\. CHAP. XLV. 
 
 Grjes an account of a farther^ and more laudable 
 motive y to induce Mr, Irue-imrth to fut cfhis 
 intended journey into the country. 
 
 THHOUGH it is impofTible for a man of fenfe 
 * to have any real love for a woman whom he 
 cannot efteem, yet Mr. True worth found enough 
 in the agreeable perlbn and fprightly humour of 
 mifs Flora, to diflipate thofe uneafy refltfiions, 
 which, in fpite of him, had lurked in his mind, 
 on Mils Betly's account : —the amour with this 
 fond girl afK)rded him a pleafing amufement for 
 a time, and, without filling his heart with a new 
 pafTion, cleared it of thofe remains of his former 
 one, which he had taken ib much pains to extir- 
 pate. 
 
 Whenever he thought of Mifs Betfy, as it was 
 impoflible a young lady, he once had loved with 
 io much rendernefs, /hould not fometimes come 
 into his thoughts, it was only with a friendly con- 
 cern for her imagined fall.——* It is no wonder,* 
 would he often fuy to himfelf, * that fo young, 
 * and lovely a creature, under the tuition of a 
 woman of lady Mellafin's chara<51er, and "the 
 conflant companion of one of mils Flora's dii- 
 pofifion, endued with charms to excite the warm- 
 ell v^ifl^es, and unprovided with fufficient arms 
 for her defence, ihould have yielded to the 
 temptations of an unwarrantable flame.'—- la 
 finty he pitied her, bu.t no more. 
 
 Thus entirely freed from all prepoffefHon, and 
 his heart almoit in the fame liiuation, as before he 
 never knew what it was to love, he was ealily 
 perfwaded by his friends to give overall thoughts 
 of going into the country, and ftay to partake, in 
 a moderate way, thofe pleafures of the town, 
 
 which 
 

<#PG# 369>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 359 
 
 which the many uneafy moments he had fuftained, 
 during his courtfhip with Mils Betfy, had kept 
 him hitherto from havin^ any relifh for. 
 
 But this il:ate of indifference lafted not long,— • 
 an object prefented itlelf to him, infpir:nv< him 
 with a paffion, which had fb much of reafon for 
 its guide, as made him think u rather his glory, 
 than his misfortune, to be a fecond time enflaved. 
 
 Among all the friends and acquaintance lie had 
 in t^'wn, there was none he more vnhied and 
 efteemed, than -flr Bazil Loveir: > — they had 
 been for fome time in Icparable companions • but 
 accidents, either on the one iide (-r the other, 
 having hindered their meeting for fevi^ral days, 
 Mr. Trueworth went one morning to viiit him at 
 his houfe:— 'he found him at home, but the 
 hall fo incumbered with trunks and boxes, that 
 tliere was fcarce a pafTige to tlie parlour door. —— 
 
 * Welcome, my deir friend,' faid fir Bizil, who, 
 having iceiw him (rom a window, run down Itairs 
 to receive him 5 ' you find me in a flrange dif- 
 
 * order here, but I have got a couple of women 
 
 * out of the country, and that fex, I think, like a 
 
 * general officer, can never move without a waggon 
 
 * load of trumpery at their tail.' ' What, mar- 
 
 * ried !' cried Mr. Trueworth. — - ' No faith,' 
 faid the other, * but the arrival of two fillers lafl: 
 
 * night from Srafi'ordlhire, gives me a forr of fpe- 
 
 * cinien of the hurry I am to expect when 1 be- 
 
 * come a husband.* 
 
 • The hurry,' faid Mr. Trueworth, * you feeni 
 
 * to cogiiplain of, muft needs be a very agreeable 
 
 * one, and I heartily congratulate you upon it. — • 
 
 * A fingle man, like you, makes but a very Ibli- 
 
 * tary figure, in a great wild ht)ufe j — thefe la- 
 
 * dies will fill the vacuum, and give a double lit'e 
 
 * to your family.'——* Nay,' refumed fir Bazil, * I 
 
 * /hall not have them long with me, — they Isare 
 
 * London, 
 

<#PG# 370>
s6o n( HISTORY 0/ 
 
 * London, and never come but once in two years, 
 
 * to bay cloaths, and lee faihions ^- — befides one 
 
 * of them isniairicd, and the other fo fond of her 
 
 * filler, that I believe (he would nor quit her to 
 ' be a dutcnefs. Indeed it is not much to be 
 
 * woiulered at, our mother dying when fhe was 
 
 * very young. Hirrick, for i'o fhe is called, was 
 
 * brought up under her fifler, who is eight years 
 
 * older than herlelf, and they never have been 
 
 * afunder two days in their lives.* 
 
 -Mr. Trueworth then expatiated on the amiable- 
 nefsofihch an harmony between perfons of the 
 lame blood ; to which Sir B.izil replied, that it 
 was more than ordinarily fortunate for his fiflers 5 
 — — ' for,' faid he, * the efder of them being 
 
 * married juft befoie my mother's d^ath, my fa- 
 
 * ther committed to her the care of the younger, 
 
 * as file was reckoned a woman of greater pru- 
 
 * dence than might b ' expedied from her }ears. — 
 
 * My bj other We Hair, for that is the name ()f the 
 
 * gentleman Oie married, though a very good huf- 
 
 * bind iti the main, is a great fportiiiian, t:ikes 
 
 * rather too much delight in his hawks and hounds, 
 
 * and gives his wife but little of his company in 
 
 * the day, fo that if it were not for Harriot /he 
 
 * would pafs hertime uncomfortably eno-ugh. — • 
 
 * In fine, the younger is improved by the Ie{T<>ns 
 
 * of the elder, and the elder diverted by the 
 
 * fprightlinefs and good humour of the younrrer. 
 
 SirBazi), who had an extieme regard for his 
 fifters, could not forbear entertaining Mr. True- 
 worth oil this liiljecT: all the time he was ^lere, 
 and at parting told him, he would not afk him to 
 flay dinner that day, becaufe he fuppo fed they 
 would be very bufy in unpacking their things, and 
 letting themfelves in order, but engaged him to 
 come on the following. 
 
 Mr* 
 

<#PG# 371>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. ^6i 
 
 Mr. Trueworth thought no farther on what had 
 pafifed, than to remember his promife, which he 
 accordingly fulfilled. —— Sir Bnzil received hini 
 with open arms, and contlufled him into the di- 
 ning-room, where the two ladies were fitting :— • 
 they were both very handfbnie :— • the elder was 
 extremely graceful, and, at firft glance, appeared 
 to be the moll: ftriking beauty of the two; but 
 on a fecond, the younger had the advantage :— — 
 fhe was not altogether lb tall as her fifter, nor had 
 a ikin of that dazzling whitenefs, but her fhape 
 was exquifite, — her complexion clear, — her 
 eyes fparkling,— all her features perfe^lly regular, 
 and accompanied with a fwecrtnels, which had in 
 it fomewhat irrefiltably at'radlive. 
 
 After the firft compliments were over, neither 
 of them loft, by their manner of converiation, 
 any part of that admiration which their eyes had 
 gained. — Mrs. VVellair talked pretty much, yet 
 lb agreeably, that no body could be tired of hear- 
 ing her : — Mifs Harriot fpoke much leis, but all 
 /he faid dilcovered a delicacy of fentiment, and 
 a judgement fir above her years. — Sir Bazil had 
 a large eftare, he jived up to the height of it, had 
 ft very elegant tafte, a^id in complaifance to his 
 iifters, as well as to his friend, who had never- 
 .dined with him before iince he fet up houfe-keep- 
 ing, and had taken care that day to omit nothing 
 in his bill of fare, that could excite, or gratify, 
 the moft luxurious appetite , yet it was the wit, 
 fpirit, and good humour of the company, cfpeci- 
 ally of mils Harriot, which, to Mr. Trueworth, 
 made the moft agreeable part of the entertainment. 
 
 When the defcrt v/as over, and the health's of 
 dblent friends toafted in Tokiy and Frontiniab, 
 rhey all adjourned into the drawing-room, where 
 coffee and tea were foon after brought in 5 — MrS. 
 Wellair having been advifed by her phyficians tb 
 . ^ Vol. I, S refraia 
 

<#PG# 372>
362 fbe HISTORY -of 
 
 tefiain the ufe of any of thefe liquors, on account 
 of fonie (iiibrder fhe had complained of, took this 
 opportunity of defiring leave to retire, in order to 
 acquaint her husband, it being poft-night, with 
 her lafe arrival in town. 
 
 Agreeable as her converfation was, Mr. True- 
 worth ffumd no mifsofher, as the lovely Harriot 
 was left behind : — on the contrary, he was ra- 
 ther rejoiced, in t^e hope fhe would now give her 
 tongue a greater latitude than fi^e had done in the 
 prelence of one, whom he eaiily perceived, Hie 
 look-ed upon asher liiperior in underflanding, a-s 
 well as years; and to provoke her to it, artfully 
 introduced feme difcourfe on the pleafures of the 
 town, and Hiid to fir Bazil, it I'eemed to him a 
 kind of miracle, thar lb \«>ung and beautiful a la- 
 dy, as mils Harriot, could content herfelf with the 
 ubfcurity of a country life. * Few of her age, 
 
 * indeed,' replied Sir Bazil, ' would choofe to live 
 
 * in the manner flie does, but though I fhould, 
 
 * perhaps, nor be of the fame way of thinking, if 
 
 * I were a woman, and in her place, yet I cannot 
 
 * but fay, myie^ion approves of her conduct in 
 
 * this point.* 
 
 'London,' faid Pne, is a very magnificent, 
 
 * opulent city, and thofe who have their lot call 
 
 * to live in it, may, doubtiefs, find liifficient to 
 
 * content them 5 but as for thofe amufements, 
 
 * which you Fc-n^lemen call the pleafures of the 
 
 * town, and whicn fb many people take every win- 
 
 * ter fuch lo.jg joujrjies nuneiy to enjoy, I can fee 
 
 * nothing ii; them, which a reafbnabie perlbn may 
 
 * not very well difpenie with the want of.* 
 
 * What think you of tiie court, madam?' cried 
 Mr. Truewortii.- * As of a place I would al- 
 
 * ways chufe to avoid,' replied Vat ; — ' I hearti- 
 
 * ly pity the fatigue of thofe, who are obliged to 
 
 * attend, and atii tempted to laugh at the Itupidky 
 
 of 
 

<#PG# 373>
Mifs Betsy THouGHTLEiss. ^6^ 
 
 * of thofe, who undertake it without necefliry. — - 
 
 * I am amazed to think how any one of common 
 ' fenfe can be at fo great an expence for rich 
 
 * cloaths, to go to a place where (he muft fufTer 
 
 * as great pain in (hewing them. ■ Blels me ! 
 
 * to (land for two or three hours together, mute as 
 
 * afiih,- • upright as an arrow, and when the- 
 
 * fcene isover, walk backward like a crab, curtfy- 
 
 * ing at every (lep, though their legs-are \^o tired, 
 
 * they are fcirce able to go through the ceremony.* 
 
 * A mafquerade then,' refumed Mr. Trueworth, 
 willing to try her farther, * what lay you, madam, 
 
 * to a ma(querade ? 1 hope you will allow no 
 'freedom of behaviour is wanting there.* — * l 
 
 * (hould like a mafquerade extremely,'^ anfwered 
 /lie, ' if conducted in the fame manner I have 
 *■ been told they are in Italy, and fome other places, 
 
 * where only per(bns of condition are admitted, 
 'and none prelumes to lay that under a vizard, 
 \ which he either would, or ou'j^ht to be afhamed 
 
 * oF, when it is pluck'd ofiF; — hut the venal ones 
 
 * you have here, are my utter detertation ; — they 
 
 * feem to me to licence, under a (hew of innocent* 
 
 * diverfion, not only folly, but all kind of pro- 
 
 * phanel's, and indecency.' 
 
 ' It mu(t be owned, madam, 'faidMr.Trueworth, 
 
 * that your fenriments on both thefe rul)je<5ts are- 
 
 * extremely juft, but you can have no fuch objec- 
 
 * tion againft a play, or opera.' — ' No, fir,' an- 
 fwered (lie, * I look iipoa a good play as one of 
 
 * the mod improving, as well as agreeable enrer- 
 
 * tainments, a thinking mind can take : and as 
 
 * for an opera,' •' Aye fiiier,' cried Sir B.izil, 
 
 interrupting her, ' the opera, take care what* 
 
 * you lay of the opera^.^ — 'my friend here is a- 
 
 * paflfionate lover of muiick, and if you utter one 
 
 * fyliable againft his favourite fcience, you will 
 
 * certainly pals in his opinion for a ftoic.*— -^ ' T 
 
 S 2 n:i(uild 
 

<#PG# 374>
;64 ni HISTORY of 
 
 * jhould delerve ir/ laid Hie, * and be in realify 
 
 * as infeniible as that fe6i of philofophers affe<^ to 
 
 * be, if 1 were not capable of being touched by 
 
 * the charms of harmony.* 
 
 * Then, madam,' laid Mr. Trueworth,' * there 
 
 * are two (.f the plealutes of London, which are 
 *■ lo happy to receive your approbation/.— ' Not 
 ' only my approbation,' replied Ihe, * but my 
 
 * appfaufe. «— I am, indeed, a very great ad- 
 
 * mirer of both, yet can find ways to make mylelf 
 
 * eafy, without being pre lent at either, and, at 
 
 * the diiiance of a hundred miles, enjoy in theory 
 
 * ali the iatisfaiSlion the reprelentutiun could af- 
 
 * ford.' 
 
 *^ This is fomewhat extraordinary, indeed, ma- 
 
 * dam,' cried Mr, Trueworth ; be lo good as to 
 
 * let us know by what method.'— It u this, (ir,* 
 arilWered ihe ^ * — as for the pJays, — Ihave 
 
 * a very good colled^ion of the old ones by me, 
 
 * and have all the new ones lent down to me as 
 
 * they come out j—— when I was laft in London, 
 
 * I was feveral times at the theatre, — I oblerved 
 
 * how the a6lors and a^refles varied their voices 
 
 * and gellurcs, according to the different charac- 
 
 * ters they appeared in on the llage 5 — and thus, 
 
 * whillt I am readmg any play, am enabled to 
 
 * judge pretty near how it fhews in reprefentation. 
 
 * -— — I have, indeed, fbmewhat more difficulty 
 
 * in bringing the opera home to me, yet I am lo 
 
 * happy, as to be able to procure a fliadow of it 
 
 * at ieali: 5— we have two or three gentlemen in 
 
 * the neighbourhood, who play to great perfec- 
 
 * tion on the violin, and feveral ladies, who have 
 
 * very pretty voices, and fome {kill in mufic • — 
 
 * my filter touches the bafs-viol finely, and I play 
 ' a little on the harpfichord ^— wc have all our 
 
 * parts in Icore before iis, which we execute to 
 
 * the bell of our power:—— it ferves, however, 
 
 *to 
 

<#PG# 375>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtlf.gs. ^% 
 
 * to divert ourfelves, and thofe friends who think 
 
 * it worth their while to come to hear us.* 
 
 Mr. Trueworth criexl our, in a kind oT rapture, 
 as loon as flie had done fpeaking, — — ' Who 
 ' would not think himielf happy to be one of the- 
 
 * audience at fuch a performance?'' — -He was 
 going on^ but Mrs. Weliair returned, on which 
 he dire(5led the compriment he was about to make 
 mifs Harriot, equally to the other j — wliich (he 
 
 returned with a great deal of politenel^. The 
 
 converlation afterwards turned on diffeienr fub- 
 je£t>;, and was very entertaining j-—Iome other 
 company coming in, Mr. Trueworth would have, 
 taken leave, but iir Bazil would not permit him 
 — he llayed the whole evening, and when he 
 went home, carried with him fuch an idea of the 
 lovely Harriot's perfe<5tions, that fcarce any conii- 
 deration would have been powerful enough to* 
 have made him quit the town, while flie conti- 
 nued in it. 
 
 CHAP. XLVI. 
 
 Returns to mtfi "Betjys adventures^ from ivhich' 
 the tiiX) former wsre but a dlgreffion^ though 
 a very necejfary one^ as mclll hereafter appear. 
 
 TF Mifs Betfy had been made acquainted with 
 ■* the manner in whicn Mr. Trueworth paffed 
 his time, and the inducements he had to Itay in 
 Ilondon, doubtlefs her vaniry would have been 
 highly piqued 5 but fhe had not as yet this fubjeft. 
 for mortification 5 on the contrary, /he rather 
 imagined he lingered here on her account, —• 
 that he repented him of the letter he had fent. 
 her, though his fpirit was too great to acknow- 
 ledge it dlre<fHy, and waited the arrival of her 
 S 3 brother 
 

<#PG# 376>
366 rZ;^ HISTORY </ 
 
 brother Frank, in hopes of engaging him to make 
 his peace. 
 
 With thefe fiiggeftions did flie pleafe herfelf, 
 whenever he came into her mind 5 but indeed /he 
 had but lirtle room for meditation on his account; 
 ^— not only Mr. Munden plied her clofe with 
 
 prefents, treats, —— fine Jpeeches, and all the 
 
 tokens of impatient love, but file had alio ano- 
 ther conqr.eil of a more late, and confequently to 
 s young jady of her humour, a more pleafing 
 aria. 
 
 She had been one day at her mantua-maker's, 
 to confult on iome matters relating to her drefs, 
 and was a little linpriied to fee the woman come 
 the next morning, before fhe was out of bed, to 
 her lodgings. . — —'Heyday, Mrs. Modely/ cried 
 ihe, * what brings you here thus early ?'*— * In- 
 
 * dtfti]^ madan-r,' anfvvered flic, * I could not well 
 
 * cotiie out 3— I have eight or nine gowns in the 
 
 * houfe now, which fhould all have l>een lini/hed, 
 
 * and fent home to-day:— —the ladies will teac 
 
 * me to pieces about them, but I left all my bud- 
 
 * neis, and run away to acquaint you with a thing 
 
 * you Utile dream of.— Ah ! Mils Betfy, fuch a 
 
 * fine gentleman ! — fuch a vaft eftate ! — but *tis 
 ' no wonder,' continued /he, * you are i'o pretty, 
 
 * that you make all the men die for you/ ■ 
 
 * \^ har is it you are talking on ?' cried Mifs Betfy, 
 
 * prithee dear Modely explain.'- ' ' Lord I' re- 
 plied the other, ' I am i'o tranfported, that I know 
 
 * not how to contain mylelf^ — • but I will tell 
 
 * you, —-you were yeiterday at my houfe,* — fir 
 ' Frederick Fineer, who lodges in my fiift f^oor, 
 
 * — the iweetefl and moft generous gentleman 
 
 * that ever lived, to be fare; but that is no- 
 
 ' thing to the purpofe, he faw you from his 
 
 * dining-room window, when yon came out of 
 
 * your chair, — and, wcfuld you believe it, was 
 
 * fo 
 

<#PG# 377>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtl^^ss. 567- 
 
 * fo flruck, that he immf»diately fell down in a 
 
 * fwoon : — you were but juil gone, when his va- 
 ' let de chambie, for he keeps three fervanrs, 
 
 * two in livery, and one our, came down to me, 
 'and fetched me to his mailer.' — 'Oh! Mrs. 
 
 * Modely,' laid he to me, * what anj^el h.ave \:hi 
 ' got below ? — Tell me who (he is ? — • If (he is 
 
 * not already married, I will give my whole eflate 
 
 * to obtain her. — I afk not what her fortune is, 
 * -r- if I could once call that divine creature my 
 
 * wife, Hie fhould command all 1 am v/'>rth.* 
 
 * Indeed, madam,' continued /he, ' I was fb 
 
 * much amazed, that I had not the power if 
 ' fpeaking 5 and he, I luppofe, interpretinr^ my' 
 
 * filence as a refufal of anfwering his demands,. 
 
 * fell into I'uch diftraffions, — fiich ravings, as 
 
 * frighted me almolt out of my wits, and ar \xiS.^ 
 
 * to quiet him, I told him, — I hope you will for- 
 
 * give me, — your name, and where you lived, 
 
 * and that you were not married:— -on this he 
 ' Icemed pretty eai'y, and I left him 5 — but about 
 ' two hours after, he fent for me again, — delired- 
 
 * I would go diref^ly to you,— make you a decla- 
 
 * ration of love in his name, and beg you to give 
 
 * him leave to vific you in perl(;n.' 
 
 ' Blefs me !' cried Mils Berfy,' * can the man 
 
 * neither Ipeak, nor write for himfelf?' — * I 
 
 * told him, madam,* refumed Mrs. Modely, 
 ' that it would not be well taken from me 5 — but 
 
 * he was quite mad, would lillen to no realbn, 
 
 * 'till I bethought myfelf of a llratagem, which, I 
 
 * fancy, you will not dilapprove : — I made him 
 
 * believe, that there was no need of my going to 
 
 * you, — that you were to call upon me abc>ut a 
 ' gown this afternoon,— that I would perfuade 
 
 * you to ftay and drink tea, and he might come in- 
 
 * to the room, as if by chance, and entertain you 
 
 * with what difcourfe he thought proper. — Now 
 
 * I would 
 

<#PG# 378>
368 The HISTORY of 
 
 I would fain have you come,* purfued /lie 5 * foe 
 if you do but like his perlon, I'uch an offer is not 
 ■ to be iejc6^ed.' 
 * I do not regard the offer/ faid mifs Betfy 5 
 but I do not know but I may come juft to divert 
 myfelf a little/— -'That's a dear good lady,' cried 
 the other.— About five, I believe, will be a pro- 
 per time.' — ''Aye thereabout,' replied niiis Bet- 
 iy 3 ' but, dear Modely, don't let him know you 
 have fpoke a word to me concerning him.'— 'No, 
 . — no, laid flie, I Aiall not tell him I have Cten 
 you.' 
 
 During the whole time this woman flayed, 
 ^jihich vias, indeed, much longer than might have 
 been expeded, from a perfon of that extraordina- 
 ry bufineis /he pretended, nothing was talked on 
 but iir Frederick Fineer^ ■ — fhe told Mils Betfy, 
 that to her certain knowledge, he was of one of the 
 belt families in Cornwall 5 that he had a great 
 eifate in poffeffion, and another in reverfion, and, 
 befides, was the next of kin to a coronet 5 that he 
 kept company with nothing but lords and dukes, 
 and that they v;ere always courting his company. 
 Though mils Betfy affe6led to treat all ihe. faid 
 with indifference, yet fhe had given an attentive 
 ear to if, and aiter fhe was gone, began to rumage 
 
 over all her ornaments,' rryed one, and then a- 
 
 nother, to fee which would become her beft, in 
 order to fecure a viflory, which ihe imagined 
 would afford i'o much triumph.* * Whether I 
 
 * niarry him or not,' laid ihe to herlelf, * the ad- 
 
 * dreffes of a man of his rank will make me of 
 
 * f()me confideration in the world j — and if ever 
 
 * I do become a wife, I fhould like to be a wo- 
 
 * man of quality 5 — they may fay what they will, 
 
 * but a title has prodigious charms in it^ — rhe 
 
 * name of Fineer alfo becomes it j — lady Fineer's 
 
 * lervants there !— lady Fineer's coach to the door, 
 
 * would 
 

<#PG# 379>
Mfs Betsy Thoughtless. 5^9 
 
 * would found vaftly agreeable at the play or 
 
 * opera.* 
 
 S\\Q alfo pleafed herfelf wirh the thought-, that 
 being courted by a perfbn of firFrcderick's quality, 
 and eft.'ite^would immediately put to filence all the 
 reproaches and remonllrances fhe might othervvifc 
 have expected to be perfecuted with,by her brother 
 Frank, on Mr. Trucworth's account 5 ——and this 
 imigination w.^s, of itlclf, lirfHcient to give -Iicr 
 an infinite latisfd6lion :— — in fine, flie found fo 
 much in this new efifefl of her charms, to elevate 
 and delight both her vanity and convenience, that 
 iiie longed with as much impatience for a fight of 
 her admirer, as Mrs. Modely had told her he was 
 under, for an interview with her. 
 
 Some part of the tedious moments were, how- 
 ever, taken up, in a manner flie was far frctm ex- 
 peclmg : — /he was icarce rilen from her toiletre, 
 when word was brought her, that a young lady, 
 whocalle(^ iierielf Mils Flora Mellafin, was come 
 to wait upon her. As fhe had never feen her fince 
 her being driven from Mr. Goodman's, the vifit 
 a little lurprifed her, and fhe would have been 
 glad, if common civility had difpenfed with her 
 receiving it j for though the pity fhe then had felt 
 for her misfortunes, had greatly eflRiccd the me- 
 mory of the injurious treatment fhe had met wirh 
 from her, yet /he never defined to continue any 
 correfpondence with her, after they were once 
 parted : befides, as file had no reafbn to look up- 
 on her coming as any proof of her friendfliip or 
 good-will, but rather with a dcfign of doing her 
 ibme private prejudice, fhe relblved to behave 
 entirely relerved towards her. 
 
 Her conjectures were not groundlefs that 
 
 complication of every worll pailion that can fill 
 the human heart, could not be perfedly fatisfied, 
 even amidll the mofl unbounded gratification of 
 
 her 
 

<#PG# 380>
370 ne HIST DRY of 
 
 her amorous defires, with the man that had excited 
 them : — the dread of lofing him embittered all 
 the tranfports of poflcflion 5 fhe very well knew 
 he had broke off with Mils Betfy, and doubted 
 not but that event had happened through the arti- 
 fice fhe had put in practice 5 yet as there was a 
 poflibility, that the adventure of Denham fliould 
 be unravelled, and the innocency of Mifs Betfy 
 cleared up, fhe trembled kit fuch an ecclaircife- 
 ment /hould renew all his former tendernefs for 
 that once fo much loved rival, and herfelf be re- 
 duced to all the horrors of defpair and i'hame. ^^ 
 It was, therefore, to found the inclination of Mils 
 Betfy, that alone brought her thither, in the wick- 
 ed hope, that if there was the leafl: probability of 
 a reconciliation between them, fhe might find 
 fome opportunity of travelling all the fteps that 
 might be taken by either party for that purpufe. 
 But Mifs Betfy was too much upon her guard, 
 to give her any room to difcover what her fenti- 
 inents were in tha-t poinf : — ^^—jhe received her 
 very coolly, and even on her firft entrance told 
 her, that fhe was obliged to go out that evening 5 
 but the other taking no notice of the little plea- 
 fure Mifs Betfy expreffed on feeing her, told her, 
 /he came out of friendship to vifir her;—- that 
 file had been told Mr. Trueworth and (he were 
 entirely parted, — that if fhe had fo great an 
 affeilion for him, as the world had been plea fed 
 to fay, fhe nuirt certainly (land in need of ail the 
 conlbl::rif>n conld be given her : — ' but, I hope, 
 
 * my dear,' laid (lie, * you have too much good 
 
 * fenfe, not to defpiie him now. Nothing is more 
 
 * common than that men fhould be falle. — Re- 
 ' member what the poet fays: 
 
 * Ingratitude's the fin, which, firft or lafl, 
 *- Taints the whole lex j. the catching court- 
 diieafe.' 
 
 Mifs 
 

<#PG# 381>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 371 
 
 Mifs Betiy was fo provoked at being talked to 
 in this manner, that ilie replied, That there was 
 neither falfhood nor ingratitude in the cale ;— — 
 if Mf. Trueworth had de(i(led his vifirs, it was 
 only becaufe he was convincc^d /be deiired not 
 the continuance of them. 
 
 'Tis poffible the(e words were more galling to 
 the jealous heart of Mifs Flora, than any thing 
 (he could have faid, though fhe (poke them witK 
 no orher intent, than to clear herfelfof the im- 
 pucaiion of having been forfaken ^ — a thinr^ fhe 
 looked upon as the worfl: bleniifh that C(vuld be 
 cafl upon her reparation. —• Mils Flr)ra finding no 
 more was to be got out of her, took her leave for 
 this time, relblvmg, however, in her own mind, 
 to keep up an acqu.iinfance with her ; that fecm- 
 ing, to her, the moft likely way, both to fatisfy 
 her curioiity, and prevent any effort of what 
 the extravagance of her paflion made her appre- 
 hend. 
 
 Mifs Betly did not give herfelf much trouble 
 in refle6ting on what Mifs Flora had laid, but as 
 foon as her w^^tch reminded her of the appointed 
 hour, Hie bid her footman fiy and get a chair : — 
 on her coming to the houfe, Mrs. Modely herfelf 
 opened the door at the firft rap, and defired her 
 
 to walk in. ' No, — no,* faid Mifs Betfy, ilill 
 
 fitting in the chair, * I cannot ftay, — I only call- 
 
 * ed to tell you, that I will have the fi Iver robings 
 
 * put upon the gxttn night-gown, and will buy a 
 ,* new trimming tor the pinkV 1 /hall be fure 
 
 * to obey your orders, madam,' replied the other 5 
 
 * but I niuft intreat you will do me the honour to 
 
 * come in, and drink a difh of tea, — the kettle 
 
 * boils, and I have juft now had a prefent of a ca- 
 
 * nifter of fome of the finell hyfon in the world.* 
 — 'Imuft kave you then as foon as I have 
 ' taited it/ faid Mifs Betiy, coming out of the 
 
 chair, 
 

<#PG# 382>
378 - r/^# H I S T O R Y of 
 
 (cbair, * fori have twenty vifits to make thiseven- 
 
 She had not been three minutes in the parlour, 
 when the perlbn, for whom all this ceremony 
 was afie<5ied, enrered the room m Ibmevvhat of 
 an abrupt manner, — * I come, Mrs. Modely, to 
 conr^plain,' faid he 5 — * my lervanis tell me.' —— 
 With thefe words he flopped fhort, and fixed his 
 ejes full on mils Betfy, with a kind of aftoni/h- 
 mcnt. — Mrs. Modely pretending to be in a great 
 fright, cried, * For heaven's fake, fir Frederick, 
 
 * what is the matter ? — I hope nothing in my 
 
 * houie has given your honour any caufe of com- 
 
 * plaint?' — * No, no, 'tis over now,' cried he, 
 
 * your houfe is become a temple, and this is me 
 
 * divinity that honours it with her prefence 5 — 
 
 * this Grecian Venus,' — Mifs Betfy was too 
 much acculiomed to company to be eafily abafhed, 
 and anfwered brilkly, * if you mean the compli- 
 
 * ment to me, fir, the Grecian Venus's are all 
 ' painted far, and I have no refemblance of that 
 
 * perfection.' — ' Only in your face, madam,' 
 
 * returned he,- — fuch fparkiing eyes, — fuch a 
 
 * complexion, — fuch a mouth , — in your fnapc 
 
 * you are a Helen of Troy.' — ' That Flelen of 
 
 * Troy,' faid Mifs Betfy, wiih an ironical Imile, 
 
 * I think was a Gtcccian princeis, and mull alfo 
 
 * be fat, or fhe would not have been reputed a 
 ' beauty there.' 
 
 The baronet finding by this, he had been guilty 
 of an abfurdity, when he intended a fine I'peech, 
 thought to falve up the matter by faying, * Sure 
 ' yoiT are Diana then.' — * Worle and worfe,' 
 cried Mifs Betfy 5 — *l befeech you, fir,' com- 
 
 * pare me to no fuch boillerous goddefs, that runs 
 
 * up and down, bare footed and baie Icg'd, hunt- 
 
 * ing wild boars in the forefl !' — ' What (hall I 
 
 * caH you then,' refumed he ? — * O ! tell me by 
 
 • what 
 

<#PG# 383>
Mifs Betsy Thoughtless. 3'2j 
 
 * what name you wili be worfhipped ?' — ' Tiie 
 
 * lady's name, fir Frederick,' cried Mrs. Modely 
 haftily, *is Mils Betl> ThoughtlefV'— » Jierly/ 
 faid he ? * then Betfy let it be.-— iietfy (lull 
 
 * henceforth become more famous than Cytherea 
 
 * was of old.' 
 
 He was goins^ on with this fuJlome fluffy in 
 which he wis often expoled by the ready wit of 
 Wifs Betfy, when a maid belonging to the houfe 
 came in, and told her that a genriemin in a hack- 
 ney coach was at the door, and defired to f'peak 
 with her. -^ ' With me !' — cried fhe, not able to 
 guefs who fliould have followed her thero, * pray 
 
 * call my footman, and bid him afk the perlon's 
 ' name that enquues for me.' — The maid did 
 as fhe was ordered, and Mifs Betfy 's fervant pre- 
 lently after brought her this intelligence, — ' Mr, 
 
 * Munden, madam,' faid he, * not finding you at 
 
 * home, has taken the liberty to call on you here, 
 
 * in order to condu61 you where you are to pals 
 
 * the evening.' — * He mufl be a happy man, in- 
 
 * deed, dare take fuch liberties,' cried fir Frede- 
 rick, fomewhat fiercely. — * Many take more 
 
 * than they are allowed to do,' faid Mifs Betfy. 
 •— * Go,' continued fhe, * to the fellow, and 
 
 * tell him, my mind is changed, — that 1 cannot 
 
 * leave the company I am with, and will not go/ 
 — Mr. Munden having received this meflGige, 
 ordered the coachmun to drive away, very niucli 
 diflatisfied, as the reader may eafily fuppole 
 
 Mifs Betfy, the day before, had agreed to pais 
 this evening with the ladies at St. James's, and 
 fome others, to play at cominerce, a game then 
 
 very much in vogue ^ Mr. Munden was to be 
 
 one of the company, and calling at Mils Betly's 
 lodgings, in hoj)es of having fome time with her 
 before this meeting, the maid, who had not lived 
 long enough with her miilreis to know her hu- 
 
 Vol. I. T mour^ 
 

<#PG# 384>
374 fl>i HISTORY, f^^: 
 
 moiir, prelently told him, fhe was only gone to 
 lier manrua- mailer's, and gave him diredions to 
 the houlej he alfo thinking it no indecorum to 
 call on her at the houfe of a woman of that pro- 
 feffion, had reafon enough to be mortified at the 
 rebuff he met with for io doing. 
 
 As to Mifs Berfy, though (he was a little angry 
 at the freedom Mr. Munden had taken, yet 
 /he was in reality much more plcafed^ — and 
 this for two reafons ; — firft, becaufe fhe law it 
 gave her new lover feme jealous apprehenfions 5 
 and, fecondly, becaufe it furnifhed her wifh a 
 plaufible pretence for complying with his entreat- 
 ies to flay, which Oie protefted, Ihe would not on 
 any terms have been prevailed upon to do, but to 
 prevent either him, or Mrs. Modely, from fuf- 
 peding ihe would go where Mr. Munden had 
 deiired. 
 
 Mrs. Modely went out of the room feveral 
 timts, as if called away by fome houfliold affairs, 
 that fir Fredericic might have an opportunity of 
 declaring his paffion to Mifs Betfy, which he did 
 in much the fame rodomontade (train, with which 
 he had at firft accofted her. — A handfome fiipper 
 was ferved in, after which, fhe being about to 
 take her leave, he affeded to be in a great fret, 
 that a fine new chariot which, he faid, he had 
 befpoke, was not come home, that he might have 
 feen her fafe to her lodgings, with an equipage 
 fuirable to her merit, and the admiration ne had 
 of it :— he would needs, however, attend her in 
 another chair 5 which piece of galk-inrry, after a 
 few faint rcfuials, fhe accepted. 
 
 End of tte First Volvme- 
 

<#PG# 385>
r^R 
 
 I 
 
 c»tt- 
 
 dJi 
 

<#PG# 386>


<#PG# 387>
