
<#PG# 0>
The gnomes of the Saline MountainsAnna Goldmark Gross, I. T. Ballin, Shakespeare Press

<#PG# 1>


<#PG# 2>
• PUBLISHERS' WEEKLY.
MAR 23 1813

<#PG# 3>

<#PG# 4>
THE NEW Yoº.
PUBLIC LIBRARY
Astok, LENºx ANt
TILBEN four ºa Frona,


<#PG# 5>
WHISPERED
MALICIOUS
TALES
INTO HIS
EARS


<#PG# 6>
The Gnomes of the
Saline Mountains
A FANTASTIC NARRATIVE
By
ANNA GOLDMARK GROSS
Author of "The Whim of Pate," and numerous
short stories and plays.
1
THE SHAKESPEARE PRESS,
114-116 East 28th Street,
New York.
1912.
DW

<#PG# 7>
::- \'E"W YORK
Ipublic library
585785
mDE*< .">.'•-• >ONS.
R 19''3
Copyright, 1912,
by
ANNA G. GROSS.

<#PG# 8>
I dedicate this book to the
blessed memory of my
father. jt jt jt

<#PG# 9>
- - - -
• • • •
· · · -
• •
• • • • •
• • • •

<#PG# 10>
ILLUSTRATIONS
by
I. T. BALLIN.
Whispered malicious tales in
his ears Frontispiece
He gazed at the fair form in bridal attire
lying upon the floor - 104
Here, Miss, I ain't got no money but I'd
like to give you them shoes ... 117
Confessing all to the wonder-working
Saint ------- 167

<#PG# 11>

<#PG# 12>
Near Dresden lies a garden,
Therein a cherry tree,
Beneath whose fragrant shadow,
Came happy dreams to me.
On its bark my love for her,
In ardent words I traced;
In rapture, then in sorrow,
Trembling with nervous haste.
The moon so bright had risen,
Those words glared forth at night.
I glanced at them all frightened,
Then screened them from my sight.
On zephyr's wave a whisper came,
From wicked gnomes to me addressed:
"Come here, come here, thou human toy,
And find with us thy final rest."

<#PG# 13>

<#PG# 14>
The Gnomes of the Saline
Mountains
A FANTASTIC NAERATIVE
I.
Though rather early in the morning, the well-
known esplanade along the beautiful Traunsee at
Gmunden, surrounded by green-decked Saline
Mountains, was already thronged to overflowing
with eager-looking sightseers, watching excitedly
the completion of the grandstands which were
now being erected for the great event of the day.
Special trains arrived hourly from Ischel, Aus-
see, Hallstadt, and other mountain resorts of
prominence, and the excitement seemed to in-
crease each moment more and more.
Humdrum life was thrown aside by young and
old; everyone looked on expectantly, reviewing
the grandstands, the tourists, and everything new
around them.

<#PG# 15>
Fair-browed girls robed in spotless white mus-
lin, garlanded with flowers and bright with rosy
badges in honor of the occasion, were seen here
and there, while their eyes sparkled and their lips
drank from the cup of happiness, enjoying life
and the blessing of being young.
The constantly increasing throng of summer
visitors and tourists from all parts of the globe,
speaking different languages and wearing out-
landish clothes, made up a bewildering picture,
while the July sun beamed down upon them, and
over lake and green-decked mountain-tops.
The much talked of floral regatta of 1910 was
not to take place until five, but by one o'clock the
grandstands near the water, hardly completed,
began to fill rapidly with the elite of Viennese so-
ciety. These floral festivals, which had been so
popular in previous years, were to be surpassed
in artistic splendor and brilliant originality by to-
day's display of picturesque effects, and symbol-
ism of national life.
Members of the highest nobility had consent-
ed to take leading parts in the regatta, which was
under the protectorate of the Archduke Victor,

<#PG# 16>
Many celebrities of the musical world, living
there in their beautiful cottages, were seen quietly
taking their seats. The great bare mountain
"Traunstein" seemed to smile down on them
from his aerial height in friendly approval; they
were no strangers to him, these music giants, but
rather belonged to his enthusiastic admirers.
Every spring they came to him, seeking relax-
ation for their over-strained nerves, and every
fall, when his bald head began to be covered with
a cap of snow, they went home full of elasticity
and creative power, often bringing along concep-
tions of masterpieces which were later to fill the
entire musical world with admiration. No won-
der then, that the bald-headed old fellow up there
so high above his neighbors looked down so proud-
ly upon them.
Loud blasts of trumpets in the distance an-
nounced to the patiently awaiting throng the ap-
proach of a long line of richly decorated boats.
Archduke Victor, leading the procession, sat in
the stern of his boat, which was gorgeously ar-
rayed to represent a bower of field roses. He open-
ed the festival by throwing red carnations into

<#PG# 17>
the water as far as his hand could reach. Next
came the customary exchange of greetings among
the Austrian nobility, whose elaborately decorat-
ed boats were stationed on both sides of the lake.
At their approach, the orchestra on the esplanade
burst forth with the National anthem of Austria,
and the spectators applauded frantically.
Eight and left, as far as the eye could see, the
shimmering surface of the lake, with its little,
gently splashing wavelets, was covered with
brightly colored crafts, every one an unique mar-
vel of its kind.
There came splashing along a huge Easter
egg, made up of lilies of the valley; here a pago-
da of large sunflowers called forth the admiration
of the delighted sightseers.
From the opposite shore there came floating a
half opened Nautilus, out of which a green-clad
naiad cast coquettishly her golden net, trying to
catch some inexperienced young fish in her golden
meshes. Nearby sailed a sleeping beauty (though
rather wide awake) embowered enchantingly in
clusters of American Beauties, looking in all di-
rections for her enchanted Prince to appear and
make ardent love to her.

<#PG# 18>
Suddenly there came, as if by magic, a gon-
dola from the other side of the lake; it was gor-
geously decorated, shining brightly in the brilliant
afternoon sun. This floating work of art was
made of lotus flowers, over which a canopy of
glittering, diaphanous material was hanging, pre-
sumably as a suitable background for a lady now
the cynosure of all eyes. She was of such en-
trancing beauty that all who beheld her sat spell-
bound and actually forgot to applaud, according
to the customary greeting to newcomers, scarcely
knowing which to admire first; the magnificent
craft, so artistically constructed, or the dazzling
apparition within.
Amazed and speechless, the distinguished
gathering gazed at her. "Who is she?" they
whispered to each other. Her name was not on
the list of nobilities. Nobody knew anything
about her, but she was gorgeously dressed, her
costume representing that of Cleopatra, made up
of pale green crepe de chine, covered with little
amorettes of silver pearls, which hung loosely in
artistic folds about the luxurious outlines of her
bewitching form. Long flaxen hair, artistically

<#PG# 19>
arranged, set off with diamond sparks, fell about
her, and shone like molten gold in the setting sun.
It was supposed to be a real reproduction, accord-
ing to ancient pictures, of the flirtatious Queen of
Egypt, seen in the art galleries of Florence, Genoa
and Eome. Her large black eyes held a singular
fascination in their sparkling depths, which if
once looked into, fastened themselves upon the
imagination of man to be forgotten no more.
At the sight of all these splendors amid such
exclusive surroundings, she looked with a fright-
ened stare into space, as if she were a newcomer,
a stranger in this atmosphere of wealth and dis-
tinction. Her features were rigid and white, and
she seemed fascinated, dumb with admiration at
the sight of the splendid surroundings. For this
reason, she had failed to notice the sensation her
beauty had aroused among the masculine sight-
seers.
A slender man, with deep set eyes, and thin
and bloodless lips tightly pressed together, sat in
an unpretentious little boat a short distance away,
murmuring grimly unintelligible words to him-
self. She caught sight of him and sent him a

<#PG# 20>
friendly glance and a smile similar to the greet-
ing of well-known friends. He did not lose sight
of her for. a moment, but almost devoured her
with his eyes.
With feverish eagerness he followed her every
movement, knitting his brows threateningly when
any boat of the Viennese "Jeunesse doree" came
with admiring curiosity too near to her's. In his
jealous rage he felt like driving all of them from
the spot.
He began to reproach himself for having yield-
ed to her cajoling entreaty to be allowed to take
part in the festivity.
"Miserable fops," he murmured contemptu-
ously, as he contemplated the admiring men with
a scornful sneer. "I loathe the sight of all these
nobodies," he grumblingly soliloquized.
Many of them, in fact, had nothing to boast
about. Many of these so-called nobles in addition
to a noble name, combined magnificent poverty
and an abhorrence for honest work; they acquired
a heap of debts and their inherited estates were
often in the hands of unscrupulous usurers, or
mortgaged to the last cent, while the sneering

<#PG# 21>
one had money in such abundance that he could
have purchased patents of nobility for an entire
regiment, and still have a reserve revenue from
his unfathomable gold mine in South Africa. His
finances would have allowed him the luxury of
such a woman—although it must be whispered he
had a wife in England, divorced some people as-
serted.

<#PG# 22>
II.
It was seven o 'clock; the great animated festi-
val drew near its end. At a given signal from the
master of ceremonies, the music on the esplanade
stopped; a hush fell on the distinguished gather-'
ing.
Archduke Victor, in his own exalted person,
was to award the stipulated prizes to the boats
of most artistic and original designs.
The fanfares sounded gayly over land and sea,
and all the boats small and large ranged them-
selves in a semi-circle about the illustrious judge.
The first prize, a silver statuette of the Goddess
Hebe, was awarded to the fascinating princess of
Egypt.
With a flourish of trumpets, and amid shouts
of applause from the enthusiastic throng, all
looked around for the boat of the prize winner.
But there was no sign of it anywhere, nor was the
single boat of the slender Englishman to be seen
any more.

<#PG# 23>
At a given signal from Mr. Ogden, the artisti-
cally constructed little boat had quietly turned
about, and the two, availing themselves of the
general excitement over the awarding of prizes,
had quietly slipped away behind the neighboring
piers, where the palatial home of the unfortunate
Archduke Johann Salvatore is to be seen. He is
better known to the outer world under the pseu-
donym "Johann Orth."
His sorrowing mother is still seen by passers-
by sitting near the window with expectant eyes
waiting for the lost son to return.
The brilliant floral festival enacted on the lake
was at an end. On the esplanade were still seen
groups of excited spectators discussing with great
animation once more, the singular disappearance
of the wonderful little boat that was fortunate
enough to win the first prize and whose occupants
disappeared without claiming that distinction.
Others lost no time in entering the brightly illum-
inated cafes in the vicinity of the esplanade to re-
fresh themselves after the excitement of the grand
event.
On the eastern horizon a thin, fleecy scarf of

<#PG# 24>
clouds was visible and the silvery moon with all
her sparkling companions had just come out to
beam upon the scene. The West was a single
shrine of beryl, whereon ruby flakes of vapor
seemed to float through the universe.
Meanwhile the much-admired boat was silently
gliding over the surface of the gently splashing
waves. The half reclining form of the fascinat-
ing woman seemed in the amber moonlight to re-
semble that of Aphrodite, as if risen from the
waves and in a wanton mood, anxious to make a
trial performance all by herself of her incontesta-
ble power over the other sex.
"Am I really so fascinating? Did those ad-
miring glances tell the tale of my triumph!" she
murmured with a happy smile to herself, looking
askance at the boat alongside her's, where her
jealous admirer sat with gloomy eyes, consumed
by jealousy.
Mr. Ogden, to whom she owed all this splen-
dor, regarded with unconcealed displeasure the
day's proceedings. He reproached himself for
having yielded to her entreaty. She had begged
and coaxed him so much, until he gave his con-

<#PG# 25>
sent, then he ordered the decoration of the boat.
Her costume was especially ordered from the most
expensive tailor according to ancient pictures of
the Egyptian Queen. Ogden undoubtedly wanted
her to be the most striking figure on the lake.
And now! Was he really jealous because she
was the most admired, the most beautiful? "Jeal-
ous? Ho! ho!"
She shrugged her white shoulders with a con-
temptuous smile.
Did he really think that she loved him?
"Phew!"
She had only accepted his ardent devotion to
learn what riches and luxury really meant, for
which she had an uncontrollable longing, a long-
ing that almost devoured her! Night and day she
thought of it, how to get rich.
The aggressive poverty in which she had passed
her earlier days, was too hideous to dwell upon;
she could not think of it without a shudder. The
idea of being poor again took her breath away.
How could she ever have consented to become the
wife of a man who was poor? "Handsome but

<#PG# 26>
poor! What an anomaly!" she said in an under-
tone, smiling sarcastically.
With bitter envy and scorn in her painfully
contracted heart, she saw the rich but most ugly
looking women rolling by in their elegant automo-
biles disdainfully glancing at her and her poor
outfit. Often enough when she was working,—
engaged in the performance of her household du-
ties in the two small dark rooms of a tenement
house, without pure air, without light to brighten
her beautiful face, she cursed everything. This
hovel her home! And she had the priceless gift
of beauty! She made up her mind not to stand it
any longer.
The day came when she was seized by such a
consuming desire to go in pursuit of pleasure, to
wear elegant, stylish clothes and feel the admir-
ing glances of the other sex resting upon her, that
meeting Mr. Ogden by accident and dazzled by his
wealth, captivated by his costly presents, she ac-
cepted his proposal to go with him forgetting
everything, even the sacred duty of a mother.

<#PG# 27>
III.
The much-admired little boat was now ap-
proaching the narrow bay which is only two min-
utes distance from Gmunden. There stood the
spick and span victoria of Mr. Ogden; the two
black horses attached to it struck out sparks of
fire with their impatient hoofs. The tall Eng-
lishman who had distanced her, stood there wait-
ing. The moment he caught sight of her bewitch-
ing face, his eyes sparkled and smiling sweetly
at her, helped her tenderly out of the boat.
The sun had just gone down behind a fleecy
cloud and kindled a volcano, from whose silver-
rimmed crater fiery rays of scarlet shot up al-
most to the clear zenith. She looked fatigued and
closed her eyes for a moment. Now she caught
sight of him and smiled, allowing him to take her
away—
Tenderly kissing her hand, he led her to the
carriage, lifted her carefully in and wrapped a

<#PG# 28>
costly cloak, which was laying there, around the
enchanting form he so adored.
She did not speak, but sat by his side in si-
lence. He gazed at her several times and then
gave the order to start. The carriage set off
at a rapid gait.
The light of day was rapidly failing. Day and
night seemed to join hands in a twilight mystery;
black clouds were now piling up threateningly on
the western horizon. A heavy gust scattered the
thick aggressive atmosphere. Flying leaves were
lifted up in the air as if by magic, and went
through the wildest dances to the piping and howl-
ing of the storm, which now commenced to rage
in all its fury, while voices of sinister shadows in
the air, seemed to hold intercourse with others
in the distance.
In these high mountainous regions a few mo-
ments suffice to turn a smiling landscape into a
cheerless dripping desert. Claps of thunder and
flashes of lightning followed each other at brief
intervals. The rain now fell in torrents and the
howling storm whipped the green lake whose
wavelets had been so gently splashing half an
hour ago.

<#PG# 29>
rv.
During the events described in the preceding
chapter, a man still in the glow of youth was
walking through the valley surrounded by lofty
saline cliffs, in this howling storm, while clouds
of shrivelled leaves danced above his head. He did
not mind the dreary desolation around him.
His face, naturally strong with manly beauty,
was now pale and haggard, showing unmistakable
traces of a great sorrow. His large intelligent
eyes were now sunk deep in their sockets. A ner-
vous restlessness made him shiver, and his pale
cheeks gathered only a little color when an obsti-
nate cough threatened to rend his suffering
breast asunder.
His coat betrayed the elegant cut of the fash-
ionable tailor, but it was now old and worn, and
hung loosely about his emaciated form. He looked
like a teacher on whom fortune had persistently
turned her back.
He carried in his hands a thick book, carefully

<#PG# 30>
wrapped up in a handkerchief, which he clasped
tightly almost tenderly to his breast, as if afraid
at any moment it might escape or drop out of his
hands. This idea made him tremble. It was in-
deed his only source of income; by the aid of this
valuable book he had already earned many a gold
piece in the Tyrolian and Styrian mountains.
His humorous lectures had been received with
great approbation in different hotels frequented
by many foreign tourists. And still, his earn-
ings were not sufficient to support him and his
motherless child, pretty little Marie, whom he had
left in the meantime with a family of friends in
Dresden. Every silver groschen he had earned
was for the support of his child.
He had come all the way from Hallstadt, and
this long walk had exhausted his strength consid-
erably; and his heart was sick and heavy. Now
he felt a frightful nervousness, fearing not to be
able to reach in time the hotel where he was an-
nounced to deliver his numerous lecture.
He walked as quickly as he could to the far-
ther end of the valley, where he expected to see
a clearing in the forest, and an open road to the

<#PG# 31>
hotel. But on all sides lie met high, unfamil-
iar cliffs. Apprehension fell over him like an icy
rain. <<-"Wijij
"Can I have lost my way?" he murmured,
breathing heavily, while great beads of perspira-
tion broke out on his forehead.
In an hour's time he was supposed to be at the
Mountain View Hotel, and now . . . He looked
helplessly around. Darkness began to fall, con-
testing every inch of ground with retreating day-
light. His teeth were chattering with a cold chill,
when he set out to find another opening.
The continuous excitement of this wandering
from one hotel to another, the consuming sorrow,
the bleeding wound in his heart, had gradually un-
dermined his constitution, originally none too
strong, and now this wearing cough, the insidious
fever! . . "How upset I feel; it's the peculiar
atmosphere," he said to himself. At the same
time he remembered that the entertainment he
proposd to offer this evening, was not sufficiently
furnished with witty epigrams and bon mots. So,
bowing and smiling to an imaginary audience of
cosmopolitan taste, he began to rehearse his lee-

<#PG# 32>
ture as he walked on, sharpening the humour and
adding some popular Austrian witticisms in
vogue as trump cards.
Suddenly he looked up and saw a dark cloud
threatening down upon him. Heavy gusts of
wind commenced to bend the tops of the high, in-
penetrable trees. The songs of the mocking birds
rang from the cedars in the distance in his ear
and startled him.
He stopped in alarm and looked distractedly
around him. Where was he? He could not make
out. In the marshy places the fireflies were seen,
wandering about and looking in the distance like
malicious eyes of-wicked sprites.
There was no longer any doubt, he had taken
an entirely wrong direction.
Trembling with excitement, fearing delay, he
rushed back to look for the right path, while his
hot breath grated audibly on his weak lungs. A
fearful storm was gathering, whispering and sob-
bing like complaining, frightened witches now
whirling the leaves into the air vehemently as if
driven by the furies of Hades.
A cold shudder ran through his fevered frame.

<#PG# 33>
He gazed in helpless despair up and down, not
knowing where to turn, while the rain poured
down in torrents, soaking him from head to foot,
and the centuries old tree-tops groaned and moan-
ed like lost souls in Dante's Inferno. Now every-
thing began to swim around him. Nature was in
an uproar and bluster. Every little glowworm
seemed to his frightened eyes to grow to gigantic
proportions dancing wildly about.
Sharp flashes of lightning lit up the Traun-
stein ever and anon and seemed to come nearer
and nearer, as if trying to march straight down
upon him. He wanted to retreat, but could not
move; there was a dark mist before his eyes. Ut-
tering a piercing cry, he fell to the ground in a
heap because the big monster kept on advancing.
With a tremendous crash, the great mountain
burst apart and a whole troop of tiny, little moun-
tain gnomes came out, dancing grotesquely like
sprites of another world.
They were garbed in white vestments, like
fleecy vapors, with brazen girdles which seemed
to be sunbeams, and a cloudy stuff supposed to be
mantles hung loosely around their diminutive

<#PG# 34>
forms. "With bare feet they pattered down upon
him. As soon as they caught sight of him they
commenced to giggle, swarming around him in
great merriment. And then they put their ludi-
crous little heads together and pointed at him
with contempt, whispering tales in falsetto tones
to each other, which he could not understand.
But he saw by the glare of their twinkling little
eyes that they meant him, that they touched on
something in his past life.
By and by they became bolder and touched his
wet clothes; some of the older ones bent down to
him and whispered malicious tales about his wife
into his ears. He groaned aloud. "It is a he!
I don't believe a word of it!" he screamed, curs-
ing the whole deceitful band. In his indignation
he tried to rise several times in order to drive
them away—down into the foaming stream, or
back into their mountain riff; but he could not
move; his feet seemed to be fastened to the very
ground as if paralyzed or chained to earth. They
whispered once more the name of his wife with
scornful laughter, and passed on over hills and
valleys dancing merrily.

<#PG# 35>
E.
E-
Suddenly a bright light shone about him, il-
luminating the marshy waters; invisible choirs
were singing sweetly, as if angels were descend-
ing from heaven. His eyes dilated as he saw a
procession of tiny elves passing him, carrying
little lighted tapers in their diminutive hands.
In their midst he saw his dear mother stretching
out her arms longingly towards him.
Tears came to his eyes. The dear face! He
wanted to run to her, embrace her, but could not
stir. A cry of horror broke from his trembling
lips when the fair Siren so fatal to his life stood
before him, intervening and trying to ensnare
him again with the fascination of her glittering
eyes, her bewitching smile, speaking to him of
love and devotion which he believed again.
He listened to her; and a ray of happiness and
delight filled his lovesick heart. She comes back
to him! She loves only him! And unheeding the
beseeching beckoning of his anxious mother,
whose tortured heart writhed and bled for her
suffering son, he hastened on with the enticing
Siren,_where to, he did not know.
Suddenly they stood before a deep precipice;

<#PG# 36>
darkness surrounded them, and the old trees com-
menced to sigh and moan and bend down upon
them. Six shadowy forms with blazing torches
appeared upon the scene carrying a coffin. Just
in front of him the lid opened and the pale waxen
face of his dead mother met his frightened eyes.
He screamed aloud with horror. He had broken
that noble heart, he had killed the best of mothers,
because he had followed this evil spirit of his life.
With a loud cry he threw himself upon the
lifeless form and wept, while the fair siren by his
side laughed and laughed. Beside himself with
indignation he panted, trying to strike her and
hurl words of hatred in her face.; but his hands
fell helpless by his side; they had no power to
execute his will. He seemed rooted to the ground.

<#PG# 37>
V.
"Get up from this wet ground, you fellow!
How did you ever come here in this beastly
weather?" He heard a deep sympathetic voice
by his side. Awakened from his swoon, soon he
looked amazed around him. What had happen-
ed? He did not know at all. His limbs were
helpless and he lay on the ground where he must
have fallen. His treasured source of income, his
precious book, containing all his humorous lec-
tures, lay rain-soaked near his side. How long
he had been lying there unconscious, he did not
know himself. A slim well-dressed man stood
before him, doing his best to help him get up
and trying to comfort him as much as he could,
shaking his head wonderingly, and inquiring how
he ever happened to be lost in such a place.
The lecturer looked about him with great
relief. He did not see the gnomes anywhere.
So it was not true what they told him, what they
sneered at—

<#PG# 38>
His heart rejoiced. It was only a hallucina-
tion, nothing else. All he had seen and heard
must have been a stupid fancy of his tired brain.
The best proof was, that he found himself lying
helplessly on the ground, just awakening from a
swoon.
Yes, the condition of his brain was at fault;
that was as clear as daylight. "Thank God!" he
exclaimed, while a feeling of unspeakable joy
surged through his heart, now gladdened with
thankfulness.
"I came near believing all that stupid non-
sense of those wicked gnomes about my"
"Hey! listen to me, poor fellow! What in
Heaven's name, are you doing here on that wet
ground ?''
It was not until the stranger by his side had
repeated his question that he could pull himself
together and answer in a stammering, voice, while
a cold shiver shook his emaciated frame.
He looked at the stranger with dilated eyes.
"Beg pardon sir. I—I must have lost my way.
I was to give a humorous lecture at a neighboring
hotel, and—and fell down," he said helplessly,

<#PG# 39>
picking up his rain-soaked book, which he had dis-
covered within reach.
"Why, you are wet through and through, my
man. What can I do for you?" asked the strang-
er with deep sympathy.
A strange look of wonder illuminated the face
of the downfalien man. He stammered: "If
you would have the great kindness to help bring
me to the Mountain View hotel. You see, I am
expected there. I've got to earn some money to-
night yet.'' He paused to cough; his voice seemed
sepulchral.
"I have a motherless child to support." His
head was bent to hide his emotion. My girlie
must have all she needs. I—I couldn't stand it if
they were to let her go hungry. God!" Again
a vehement cough shook his wasted frame.
"Well, well, this turns out all right. I'll bring
you there as we are staying in the same hotel."
"He's got fever, sir—better let's get him on
the box," he heard the coachman say who stood
by his side looking with obvious pity at the man
before him.
A few paces away, a closed carriage was stand-

<#PG# 40>
ing with two lighted lanterns in front of it.
The storm had relented for a while, and mys-
terious silence fell upon the scene.
"Ogden!" now called out an excited woman's
voice from within the carriage. "To miss the table
d' hote on account of that wretched beggar. Why
it's just unpardonable!"
'' That voice! . . . God have mercy!''
The man on the ground stammered as if
struck by lightning. His eyes dilated, starting
out of their sockets and staring horrified at the
carriage.
"That voice," he repeated. "Could it be pos-
sible? Could she be there? Am I still under the
influence of that horrible hallucination?" he
moaned piteously. He could not and would not be-
lieve a word of all they told him.
Again he seemed to hear the revolting chuckle
of the insolent gnomes, from the Traunstein, re-
peating their malignant tales of the outrageous
conduct of his—
"Up with you quickly, for we'll have more
rain within a short time!'' said Mr. Ogden, now in
a sympathetic voice, and at the same time heeding

<#PG# 41>
the woman's command in the carriage, which he
would not have ignored for any consideration.
The coachman assisted the stranger to his seat
on the box, and then Mr. Ogden entered the car-
riage, closing the door carefully.
Then the splendid team of horses set off like
the wind. "God have pity on me! that voice!"
He could never forget the voice of that allur-
ing siren who had goaded him on, until he saw
nothing but her seductive face, listened to nothing
but her deceitful declarations of love, without
thinking of his mother's grief and her death!
Could it be possible? She here in that closed
carriage with another man? No, no! It was
another hallucination of his feverish brain.
How could she ever have attained such wealth?
"Nonsense!" he murmured smilingly to himself,
drawing a long breath of relief. Ah! how he had
adored that faithless woman!
The smiling expression died out of his face,
and a mournful compassion for his deserted child
stole into his troubled countenance. Why did she
bring so much misery into his life? Every fibre
of his noble heart had been throbbing with uncon-

<#PG# 42>
trollable love for her! And now the light of
life, the hope of future years, was blotted out,
clouds of despair and a grim night of an unbroken
desolation fell like a pall on his heart and brain.
Nothing to look forward to but misery!

<#PG# 43>
VI.
He had wandered about like a soul condemned
and lost to eternity. But the one hope to meet
her again possessed him, kept him alive. And
then—she'll come back to him—he was convinced
of that; to his lonely little Mary. And after all
she might be touched by his devoted love that
knows how to pardon and overlook certain occur-
rences in the life of a giddy-headed woman!
Unfortunately the cold, calculating coquette
had never felt a tinge of anything like love, and
had only an observing eye for the monthly allow-
ances he received from his well-to-do parents.
He had come to Dresden a young, inexperi-
enced student to pursue a course in literature and
jurisprudence. The handsome, dashing woman,
somewhere in the twenties, soon allured him with
her well tried arts. Within a short time he was
her devoted slave and did not see nor hear any-
thing else but her alluring voice, and after six

<#PG# 44>
months' acquaintance he led her to the altar with-
out the knowledge of his parents.
When they found it out, through a friend liv-
ing in Dresden, they were in despair, in their
helpless anger. His mother never recovered
from the rude shock her ambition had received.
She did not know the woman, but when she heard
that she belonged to a different faith, she was
crushed, although the noble catholicity of spirit
that distinguished her character did not allow her
to show it. Her proudest hope to see that be-
loved son some day a respected citizen and lawyer
in that little provincial town where his cradle
stood, was gone forever!
Years of wrestling with life's sorrows had set
upon her noble, benignant countenance, almost a
seal of holiness, and shed over her placid features
the mild, sweet life of a pure heart. Her white
hair, the snowy mass prematurely white, wonder-
fully softened the outlines of her face.
Now deep lines commenced to furrow her
sweet, indulgent features, and she grieved so deep-
ly over the disgrace that she began to lose her
health. Silently, without a word to her husband

<#PG# 45>
she performed her household duties, until one day
her enfeebled constitution gave way and she died,
praying for the only child she had ever had.
Her husband, Mr. Burge, under the double
stress of the sorrow, refused to hear anything of
the ungrateful son, for whom he had slaved and
worked all his life, and whose grievous mistake in
marrying an adventuress, had cost the mother's
life.
He had a large estate to look after, but he was
alone now. He needed the son, but what could he
do? He was ashamed of the daughter-in-law!
"No, not a cent of my money can she have," he
murmured constantly to himself with a flushed
face and dry lips, looking at his imposing estate,
where the beautiful Rhine rushed by and the tum-
bled down castles of long-forgotten races were
seen in the distance.
The irate father dissolved all connection with
the son and stopped all payments, denying him
any assistance whatsoever in the future.
After the regular allowance from home had
entirely ceased, it was necessary for the young

<#PG# 46>
husband to go and seek some profitable employ-
ment to support his expensive wife.
He had never earned a cent, and racked his
brain now how to get money. The tantalizing
condition pressed upon him that he might not be
able to support his family. Finally, he got a
position with a meagre salary in a newspaper
office, but he was scarcely able to provide the
barest necessaries of life.
He commenced to write short stories. Al-
though he had no ambition to climb to such a lofty
niche in the temple of fame, he thought he might
at least earn a modest income. Short stories and
humorous lectures—that must make a hit. Every-
body said that he had a humorous vein. Now the
time had come to show his mettle, but the short
stories were generally returned. The irate
father had ceased to send money and no other
help was discoverable. And then—after all that
—she, his loving wife, dropped her mask and
showed herself in her true colors.
"I have had enough of this," she said with a
disgusted shrug of her white shoulders to her

<#PG# 47>
horrified husband. "I don't intend to starve
here."
In vain he begged her to have a little patience
for the sake of their child. The last short story
must turn out to be a great success; he felt it and
was really convinced of it.
"Convinced," she sneered contemptuously
and turned away. No use of losing any breath
about it, she thought. I am through with him
anyway. Oh! How she longed to be rich, wear
stylish clothes and be admired.
The beautiful coquette became restless in her
little home; she looked about sick at heart, unable
to tolerate it any longer, only wishing to get the
opportunity to leave it forever. Her eyes were full
of scorn when looking at her husband, who could
not supply her with all that she longed for just
now, and for which she would have pledged the
salvation of her very soul. She commenced to
frequent public places in the absence of her hus-
band.
How she loathed poverty! "Anything but
that," she murmured to herself, her face white
with disgust as she walked on, gazing in all direc-

<#PG# 48>
tions to see one of her former acquaintances, with
a strange unrest in her large eyes. Her oppor-
tunity would come; she was sure of that, and it
came in meeting one day the rich Englishman
who was introduced to her by one of her former
friends and boon companions.
Shortly after this encounter, she received a
letter from the Englishman telling her of the deep
and lasting impression she had made on him and
how he longed to see her again. Her face flushed
with pleasure as she read all these, and then
perused an invitation to take an automobile ride
through the beautiful mountains.
For some time she sat dazzled, and then she
looked at the poorly furnished rooms; at her own
wretched outfit, and her eyes flashed indignantly.
"I am through with all this. Here is the op-
portunity I was longing for," she said with a
contemptuous smile. "I'll show him—the young
inexperienced fool I have married—that beauty
counts for a whole lot and . . . boldness even
more."
She stopped at the window and looked down
at the Englishman's automobile before her door.

<#PG# 49>
"The opportunity — my opportunity has
come." These words rang ceaselessly in her ears
and filled her being with a strange endeavor to
avenge herself on the man who could not supply
her with all the luxuries she craved for, and ac-
cording to her ethics, was entitled to.

<#PG# 50>
VII.
It was on Christmas eve, her husband had
come home with a radiant face. His short story
had been accepted, and the money was in his
pocket. Now he could buy a fitting present for
his wife. Of course it could not be too expensive,
but she certainly would enjoy it all the same;
he was sure of that, feeling that the opening of a
successful career was inaugurated.
On his way home he had also bought a little fir
tree to set up for the first Christmas celebration
in his own home. The recollections of similar
holidays in the house of his parents stirred him
to the depths. How his heart quivered when he
thought of his dear mother he loved so dearly.
If she only were alive how different everything
would be! He, who was brought up in luxury,
mother's pet, and now—
With deep emotion he entered the house.
With a brisk step he opened the door, looked
around and found it empty, the wife and all her
belongings gone!

<#PG# 51>
The horror of that night was something he
could never forget as long as he lived. Holding
his ten months' old child in his trembling arms,
he wept burning tears for her, the mother of his
child. Could it be possible? A mother desert-
ing her child on this holiest of evenings? He
could not believe his eyes, but all she possessed
went with her. No, no, she was giddy-headed,
but not cruel. Motherhood must assert itself
and surely would. How he loved her, how he
longed to take her in his arms and feed his poor,
famished heart with a touch of her lips!
He sat there in the dark listening and waiting
for her to come back, to see the presents he had
bought for her, and the money he wanted to give
her. But one hour after another passed and no-
body came. In the streets a joyous throng of merry
makers pushed and jostled about wishing each
other a merry Christmas. His heart was shaken
to its depths by maddening grief; by bitter dis-
appointment.
The room was icy cold, there was no fire in
the stove, and the child half starved, screamed
weakly in his arms. In wild desperation he

<#PG# 52>
trampled on the little Christmas tree he had
brought along to celebrate his first Christmas
in his own home! He could see nothing but
falsehood and treachery in this world. What
meaning was there for him in this life-redeeming
symbol?
Sick of everything he longed for death to
come and take him and his little child away.
Throughout that dreary night of agony he lay
in bed holding the child in his arms, pressing his
lips against her tender little hands, without
being able to close an eye.
The bell in the neighboring churches rang out
in the ears of the deserted man, sounding dis-
mally through his lonely house. But they
brought back pictures to his mind of his child-
hood's happy days, when he went to church on
similar Christmas eves with his parents. One tear
after another stole into his desperate eyes.
"God have mercy on me and my child," he
murmured stammeringly. "I must, I will live for
her sake. I cannot leave her altogether an or-
phan," though the gaping wound in his own heart
kept on bleeding, bleeding incessantly.

<#PG# 53>
VIII.
"ThereI Here we are at last, no weather for
a dog to be out," growled the angry coachman
sulkily, jumping down from the box and opening
the carriage door with a respectful bow, hat in
hand.
Mr. Ogden staggered quickly out and lifted
tenderly and carefully a woman's form to the wet
ground. Young Burge, the deserted husband,
had just come down with the help of the coachman
who growled something he could not understand.
He looked at the woman in the darkness and
a mist swam before his eyes; he leaned against
the coach and his knees shook so that he could
not make a single step. The night was black and
the wind sobbed down the street, while the rain
still fell in torrents.
He could not see clearly—but that voice—that
voice! God! Could they have been right—these
wicked, malicious gnomes? Did they know all
about her and now, how?" he asked himself while

<#PG# 54>
his hands clutched the book convulsively in his
helpless agony.
He thought he heard them again whispering,
with a derisive chuckle, the whole story of her
downfall into his terrified ears.
"How could she ever come to such magnifi-
cent clothes?" he thought. "Nonsense! It is sim-
ply a hallucination of a morbid, disordered brain.
I am sick and miserable and see things where
there is nothing to see." This he murmured
half aloud to himself, gazing at the retreating
form of the woman incredulously. He could not
distinguish her features and he made up his mind
forcibly, in order to quiet down his excited nerves,
that it was nothing else but a foolish trick of his
imagination, and the fever which shook him now
again was the obvious cause of it all. "Anyway,
how could she have obtained all this luxurious out-
fit? His wife wealthy? Nonsense!"
He tried to laugh cheerfully about this fool-
ishness, but suddenly he felt as though a knife
were plunged into his heart. "The gnomes! the
gnomes! If that which they had said were true!''

<#PG# 55>
He moaned to himself, leaning against the wall
in a faint condition. "Oh, anything but that...
anything but that!" His whole frame shook as
from palsy. That voice haunted him. He knew
he had to go and look at her in order to convince
himself, otherwise he could not find any rest.

<#PG# 56>
IX.
"Come, come! You must not lose your cour-
age, my good fellow," said Mr. Ogden good-
naturedly, coming out of the house at the same
time. "But before you do anything else, you
should go inside and get those wet clothes off;
yes, that you must do, my man, you look pale
enough indeed, and"
"The deuce! If that is not our expected en-
tertainer, the humorous lecturer from Ishle!"
cried the stout, dignified hotelier, with a laugh as
he caught sight of the dripping form of the poor,
dazed lecturer.
"Lord, what a state he is in! Why he isn't
able to lecture!"
"Never mind, a hot grog, some dry clothes
from my wardrobe, and the rest will soon be man-
aged," said Mr. Ogden good-naturedly with a
sign to his valet, greatly gratified in being able to
help the poor, miserable looking man with the pal-
lor of death on his emaciated face.

<#PG# 57>
"And as for your entertainment being a great
success, well—leave that to me, my dear fellow
and don't worry; it will be all right," he went on,
clapping the dazed humorist on the shoulder with
an encouraging smile.
He bowed, without being able to utter a word
of thanks; he bit his trembling lips and followed
the valet with stumbling, shivering feet.
"Who could this benevolent stranger be?
And what was he to that woman? Was he mis-
taken or not? If, after all she should be his—
his—"
A hot wave flushed his face, distorted with
shame as he thought of the possibility; his sorely
tried heart was hammering mightily within him.
He could not get rid of this thought. "If she
should really be the mother of his poor child
. . . . what, in the name of Heaven, was she
then to this man? God have mercy on me and
come to my aid!" he cried aloud, in great misery,
his teeth once more chattering audibly in a fresh
attack. "No, no! I can't and won't believe it!
She can't be so shameless as to disgrace me and
her innocent child!"

<#PG# 58>
"Come, come quickly, sir," urged the valet
impatiently, "I'll help you as much as I can."
After he had provided him with all the neces-
sary clothes from the elaborately assorted ward-
robe of the rich Englishman, who was about the
same size, he made as careful a toilet as possible,
under the prevailing circumstances and under the
careful inspection of the helpful valet.

<#PG# 59>
X.
The supper bell now rang through the vast
corridors of the Mountain View Hotel, crowded
with tourists from all parts of the continent.
Ladies, gorgeously dressed, commenced to take
their seats at the supper tables in the dining room,
escorted by elegantly garbed gentlemen; some of
them in full evening dress, others again in black
cutaway. The clatter of knives and forks had
already begun. The spacious dining room was
brightly illuminated. At the further end a carpet-
covered platform was visible, whose edges were
a bank of flowers. Everything was tastefully ar-
ranged. A pianist was already hammering away
at a waltz of one of the latest operatic successes,
with frightful execution, as an introduction to the
interesting program of the evening, anxiously
awaited by the patrons of the house.
The clatter, the bustling noise, had suddenly
stopped and all eyes were riveted expectantly on
the man who had just entered. Our humorist,

<#PG# 60>
suffering in mind and body alike, pale and hag-
gard, with restless eyes, made his appearance in
the borrowed clothes which hung loosely about
his emaciated form, tossing back his long locks
with his right hand, while holding the cherished
book tightly in the other, he came down to the
very edge of the platform and smiled and bowed
in all directions.
He looked exhausted and weary, as he was.
But the room was crowded and he had to go on,
whether he wanted or not, so he commenced:
"Ladies and gentlemen."
He got no further. A mist swam suddenly
before his eyes. A shiver shook his emaciated
frame, his face became flushed and bloated and
he stared and stared.
A side door had been opened a few minutes
before and Mr. Ogden entered with the much ad-
mired Cleopatra on his arm.
They passed through the crowded dining room,
close to the speaker's platform. She had changed
her dazzling costume for a simpler, but an ex-
tremely stylish dress of blue silk. She still wore
some of the lilies in the marvelous golden hair,

<#PG# 61>
which was now fastened with a gold comb into a
plain Greek knot. She was all aglow with excite-
ment. The triumph of the afternoon was still
lingering on her handsome face. She felt like
shouting it out to everybody. Such conquest does
not come often to a woman in the ordinary walks
of life.
She walked proudly, with a queenly step to her
seat, nodding to some casual acquaintances with
a charming smile. And then she took her seat
and turned a glance of curiosity upon the famished
face of the entertainer. Their eyes met—and for
a few seconds sank into each others' like sharp
daggers. A red tinge covered her startled face,
then she turned away, whiter than the lilies on her
breast. She trembled visibly and looked fright-
ened, casting down her eyes.
Mr. Ogden did not seem to have noticed any
change in her appearance and gazed with a shock-
ed countenance and great pity at the reduced ex-
terior of the poor humorist. Suddenly a great
excitement was noticeable among all the guests
sitting around the small tables. Several gentle-
men had left their seats, rushed towards the place

<#PG# 62>
where the poor entertainer had collapsed after rec-
ognizing his faithless wife garbed in that splen-
dor, so shamefully acquired, of which the wicked
gnomes were whispering so constantly into his
ears.
He still believed in her then; but now—the
dark, threatening expression in his livid face was
frightful to behold. He murmured something
about the gnomes that nobody could understand,
staring with hatred in his dilated eyes in the direc-
tion where she sat—she, the mother of his inno-
cent child, now disgraced forever!
"God! What have I done to deserve such a
punishment?" he murmured once more, pressing
his bloodless lips tightly together as a cold per-
spiration broke out on his deathlike face.
A vision of his mother's warning and sorrows
was presented to his benighted intelligence and
made him cry with terror and shame. The con-
flicting emotions were too much for the sadly un-
dermined constitution.
"The wicked gnomes!" he whispered with
audible scorn and contempt in his blazing eyes, as
if sudden madness had seized on him, and then

<#PG# 63>
tried to curse her, but not another word escaped
his tightly closed lips, though the blood began to
gush from them.
The truth, so cruelly thrust upon him, ended
his life's drama; his eyes closed, he fell in a heap
to the floor.
The pitying guests stood helplessly around
him and did not know what to do. Mr. Ogden was
the first one who had presence of mind to send to
the nearest village in search of a doctor.
The beautiful Cleopatra sat there as pale as
a ghost and was afraid to go near the prostrate
form of her unhappy husband, fearing that some-
one might lift the veil and show the audience the
ugliness of her real self. A feeling of restless-
ness rushed upon her as if the shameful story
were being written on her flushed face. She could
not endure it any longer and left the dining room.
Mr. Ogden did not notice her departure, and
busied himself around the dying man, asking what
he could do for him. The poor man pointed to a
letter in his side pocket where the addresses of
his friends in Dresden were written down.

<#PG# 64>
"The gnomes! . . . the gnomes!" he stam-
mered once more as the shadow of death began to
close in upon him. The blood streamed out inces-
santly, and before the aid of a doctor could be
secured, he was a corpse.

<#PG# 65>
XI.
Mr. Ogden, deeply moved, went to his rooms.
She, the cause of it all, sat at the window with
a book in her hands without reading it. There
was a look in the woman's face that amazed him,
a hard, cold look, that he had never seen there
before while the sunbeams fell on her bewitching
features and on the green leaves still in her hair.
"I want to leave the place at once," she said
without looking at him.
"That poor man's face seems to haunt you,
dear tender-hearted girlie," he replied with an
outburst of tenderness, taking her in his arms and
kissing the handsome face he loved so dearly.
It was a fortunate thing that he was blissfully
ignorant of her relation to the dead man.
Gathering up courage—seeing that no suspic-
ion had entered his mind—she raised her beauti-
ful eyes to his languidly.
''Yes, you are right, dear, I cannot stand such
horrible things ... it shocks me," she an-

<#PG# 66>
swered with her accustomed dissimulation in tone
and action.
Although she was a great adept in the art of
hypocrisy and dissimulation, she could not alto-
gether hide the uneasiness which had taken pos-
session of her. A strange expression came into
her eyes, an expression he had never seen there.
He looked at her and was puzzled. "What was it?
What brought the change about? He could not
tell.
She turned suddenly and looked out of the
window with a stony face, in order to hide, to sub-
due,—what? Did she conjure up a sinful vision
of her own life? No, she would not give in, but
she was startled to perceive something within her
she did not reckon with: a voice wanted to be
heard, no matter how hard she tried to subdue it.
It was the voice of motherhood—that feeling
seemed to be not quite dead in the heart of the
shameless woman. It was Nature's revenge!
She had to listen to the voice of Nature, or was it
conscience, slowly awakening to life?
Ah! Who would or could fathom the heart of
an unscrupulous coquette?

<#PG# 67>
"Had he any family?" she asked, indifferent-
ly, avoiding his inquisitive gaze.
"Yes, I think he has a child, here is the ad-
dress, '' he replied. '' I think it must be with some-
one he knew, poor unfortunate man. And he gave
me this in order to look up his orphan child."
A mournful compassion soon stole into his eyes.
"He could not speak any more, but the pitiful
glance of the dying man's face told me as much,
and I am going to Dresden and see whether I can
do anything for his child," he added, looking deep-
ly moved out of the window. She gazed at him
with puzzled eyes. "God! if he had an inkling
whose child that is!" she thought, remorsefully
recoiling a step with down-cast eyes and tightened
lips.
Finally summoning up courage enough, she
said, hesitatingly, as if fearing any comment:
"Yes, ... let us stop there on our way
to Switzerland."
He wanted to stay until the funeral of the poor
lecturer was over, but she would not hear of it.
She looked at him with frightened eyes when he
made the suggestion.

<#PG# 68>
"I cannot stand such scenes," she replied with
quivering lips.
"Well, well! Then we'll go, my sensitive little
girlie. That accident seemed to have upset your
nervous system,'' he said with a smile, kissing her
tenderly and gazing fondly at her troubled face.
On the following morning they took their de-
parture for Dresden, leaving some money for the
funeral expenses in the hands of the hotel keeper.
Instinctively he felt like doing something for
the man he had robbed of his happiness without
knowing it.
But the unscrupulous coquette loved nobody
but herself, knew it, felt it, though without any
remorse, that she had betrayed his deep devotion
and undying love so shamefully, fearing, in her
deceitfulness, only one thing—detection.
The following day a simple hearse, containing
the corpse of the poor humorist whose life ended
so tragically, went up a lonely hill where the
grave diggers had just finished their gloomy work.
The coffin was lowered and the grave covered with
mother earth. No mourners stood around shed-
ding tears.

<#PG# 69>
The song of a mocking-bird rang from the
downy cradle of myrtle blossoms—as a funeral
dirge—and a whip-poor-will answered from a
cedar in the neighboring woods.
When the night train going to Dresden, rushed
by, the little white cross indicating his resting
place, looked like a bleached hand of a skeleton
shining out with a ghostly radiance across the
silent, gloomy plain.
Through the fleecy vapors floating around the
lonely hill one with clairvoyant eye may see at
midnights the vacillating horde of the tiny gnomes
from the Traunstein with downcast torches re-
peating whisperingly the sad tale, and pointing
at the grave, in which the body of the dead humor-
ist, betrayed of his life's happiness, crumbles to
dust.

<#PG# 70>

<#PG# 71>

<#PG# 72>
The eye of the attentive observer who wan-
ders through Fifth Avenue, and the streets which
run into it from right and left, is especially at-
tracted by the houses, built here in the Colonial,
there in the Renaissance style. Some of these im-
posing edifices (often the only reminder of long-
vanished fortunes), with their rich facades, afford
a striking criterion of the tastes of their builders
and of their former inhabitants
In one of these houses, rearing their proud
height to the sky, a small lap-dog, bedecked with
silken ribbons, sat in a parlor window. He stretch-
ed his snowy paws with great satisfaction on the
cushioned window-seat, warming himself in the
April sun. The luxurious room behind him was
quite empty, and the enforced solitude was not
at all to the taste of the spoiled pet. It was prob-
ably for this reason that he did not find it worth
his while to bark in a superior manner at the

<#PG# 73>
pedestrians who appeared on the street, but a
look of silent contempt told very plainly that he
had made up his mind to consider as extremely
unpleasing the movements of a limping street-
cleaner who was at the moment just in front of the
house.
In fact, the lame man did not look as if he
could pretend being favored with a condescend-
ing glance by a lap-dog living amidst such sump-
tuous surroundings.
He looked, too, as if he had had no great prac-
tice at his wretched calling—as if he were a novice
at it. Although his sickly, sunken features were
surrounded by an unkempt grey beard, and his
clothing hung loosely about his wasted form, he
somehow gave the impression of being an intelli-
gent man of some education, upon whom un-
deserved misfortune pressed heavily.
The well-fed pet in the parlor window, how-
ever, had no conception of undeserved misery, and
was about casting to the winds the carefully drilled
manners of an educated dog when, fortunately,
a well-appointed carriage dreAV up just as the
lame man was preparing to go on his way.

<#PG# 74>
A delicate-looking lady with a kindly face
alighted from the carriage, and nodded smilingly
to the little dog. The lame street-cleaner had no
sooner glanced at the benevolent face of the rich-
ly-dressed woman than his emaciated form began
to tremble. His face, so pale before, became red,
as with humiliation, and in a state of marked agi-
tation he was on the point of dropping his broom
and stealing quietly away.
The lady, Mrs. Denison, who had just come
from a charitable gathering, and was still under
the influence of her charitable mood, felt hurriedly
in her purse for a silver-piece, which she instruct-
ed her servant to give the lame man as she ascend-
ed the broad steps and disappeared into the house.
"I am no beggar!" stammered the street-
cleaner in broken English, waving off the proffer-
ed alms with a trembling hand.
Within the mansion Mr. Denison, in a faultless
evening costume, turned the diamond sleeve-links
in the cuffs he was adjusting as he awaited his
wife.
Mrs. Denison laid aside her hat and cloak
and hastened up-stairs to greet him, beginning at

<#PG# 75>
once to give him a rather feverish account of the
doings of the association of which she was presi-
dent.
Presently another turn was given to the con-
versation by the entrance of a tall young man with
light blue eyes and a rather inexpressive face.
"I am done with racing for the present!" he
cried eagerly, holding out his hand.
"Thank heaven!" answered Mrs. Denison, fer-
vently.
"Eh, for once, George," said Mr. Denison
thoughtfully.
"And do you know why? My favorite won
first place—only think how lucky!" The young
man's excitement was perceptible in his panting
breath.
"And how delighted Lucy will be! Here she
comes now," said Mrs. Denison, turning to kiss
the white forehead of her daughter as she entered
the room.
Lucy, a pale, thoughtful girl, with large, medi-
tative eyes shaded by gold-rimmed glasses, held
out her finely-shaped hand to George Elmore with
a forced smile. There was, indeed, very little of

<#PG# 76>
the delight of which her mother had spoken to be
seen in her face, although the young man scarcely
seemed to notice its absence. Various sports oc-
cupied him to such an extent that he never had
time to make a study of the girl to whom he was
engaged. In addition to his penchant for amuse-
ments of the most superficial kind, the gift of
observation was entirely lacking in his inflated
brain. It was generally supposed that he was
very much in love with her, but it was a question
whether his affection for his riding-horse was not
of a similar nature.
Any one who did observe the pale face of the
young girl more closely, however, could not have
failed to notice the light quivering of her finely-
chiselled nostrils, the nervous motion of her red
lips.
In spite of the assumed appearance of calm,
which proved the power of her will, it was possi-
ble to perceive the existence within her of some
deep emotion.
She was standing by the window, the involun-
tary witness of the alms giving when it had occur-
red. The lame man in the street was no stranger

<#PG# 77>
to her; she knew his domestic circumstances only
too well, and during his stay in the hospital
had helped to support his family without confid-
ing the circumstance to her parents. Whether
she had omitted to mention it for fear of making
herself ridiculous, or from some deeper motive,
perhaps she, herself, could not at the present mo-
ment have determined.
Lucy breathed a sigh of relief when the dinner
was announced, and her fiance went away to carry
his pleasant news to other friends and acquaint-
ances.
Meanwhile the poor cripple hobbled off to his
miserable dwelling. With failing breath he
dragged himself over the great distance which
lay between him and the lower part of the city,
without once raising his eyes from the pavement,
suffering and devastating mental torture showing
in the feverish glow of his sunken eyes.
_____

<#PG# 78>
II.
Martin, the lame man, had been brought from
Lyons by Mr. Denison, the silk manufacturer, ap-
parently under the most favorable conditions. In
the silk factory in New Jersey he had proven him-
self a most skillful dyer. The Denison wares came
to be noted for their likeness to the Lyonese
goods, and in a short time, through their similari-
ty to the imported ones, surpassed all that had
hitherto been made on this side of the ocean. For
this reason the goddess, Fortune, added continu-
ally to the Denison stock of worldly treasures.
But the continued pressure of the long work-
days began to call forth loud remonstrances from
the workmen in the Denison factory. Martin,
generally looked upon as being responsible for the
improvement in the product was, consequently,
hated as being the indirect cause of that pressure.
"I'll be damned if I work a day longer for
such beggarly wages!" cried a red-headed Irish-

<#PG# 79>
man one day, bringing his fist down on the dye-
tub with an angry look.
"I can't blame him; he's in the right of it!"
answered a second workman.
"A twelve-hour day, and such hard work at
that!" cried a third one, leaving his work-bench.
"Eight you are!" exclaimed all the others,
rolling up their sleeves aggressively.
"If the boss doesn't give us an eight-hour day
and higher wages, we quit tomorrow, eh, boys'?"
cried the angry Irishman, his nose turning from
red to purple in his excitement.
Martin had been endeavoring, with ever-in-
creasing earnestness, to calm the excited minds
of the workmen, but all that he had been able to
say to this end had been laughed to scorn. The
next morning he was the only one who appeared
at the factory.
At ten o'clock came a deputation of the em-
ployees to the office of the manufacturer. Mr.
Denison was perfectly willing to agree to a raise
in wages, but he would hear nothing of an eight-
hour workday, even at the risk of having to stop
work for an indefinite period. Orders were com-

<#PG# 80>
ing in day by day. The busy season had just
opened and the shutting down of the works would
have meant a considerable loss to the manufac-
turer.
Accordingly, Martin received orders to engage
new workmen at once and set them going at their
different tasks. The strikers no sooner became
aware of this than they began to cast angry
glances at Martin.
'' Our places to be taken by others ?'' cried the
red-headed Irishman to Martin, in a voice choked
with rage, as the latter, weary and worn, prepared
to take his way homeward.
'' The dog of a foreigner is to blame for it all!"
said another with threatening gestures.
This was the beginning. The whole of the
brutal crew fell upon Martin, and soon left him
lying senseless on the ground. In this state he
was carried home. His wife, an intelligent woman,
the daughter of a doctor in Basle, and his four
children, wept loudly, as the beloved father was
carried unconscious into the house. The help of a
physician was soon at hand and after a thorough

<#PG# 81>
examination a fracture was discovered in the up-
per part of the right thigh.
The poor wife tended her unfortunate husband
with the entire self-sacrifice of a true woman,
keeping up the house as long as possible with
what little money she could painfully scrape to-
gether.
The eldest son, a youth of twenty-four, who,
having regard to his manifest talent, had educated
himself to be a painter, was unfortunately unable
to find employment just at this time, in spite of
his diligent and anxious search for it. To the se-
rious financial situation was added the bitter recog-
nition of the fact that the condition of the beloved
sufferer was daily growing worse.
Despair seized the unhappy family. The head
of the firm was the only person from whom they
might expect help. Accordingly Mrs. Martin de-
cided to go to him as soon as possible, since the
factory was to be closed for an indefinite time.
Shyly and hesitatingly she entered the office.
The thought of having to confess her dire poverty
brought a flood of red to her thin face. No one
was in the office but a clerk. To the question as

<#PG# 82>
to whether she could see Mr. Denison he answered
with a contemptuous laugh that Mr. Denison had
more important business on hand that day, and
was visible to no one. Her urgent entreaty to be
allowed to see him if only for a moment was in
vain. The clerk rudely showed her the door.
During this conversation, Lucy, the recently
betrothed daughter of the manufacturer, sat list-
ening in an adjoining room. The continued dis-
turbances at the factory had caused her so much
anxiety that she had insisted upon accompanying
her father to the works, which she had scarcely
visited before since her return from Germany.
She had studied for two years at a school in Leip-
zig, and through the intellectual treasures of Ger-
man literature and art she had become conversant
with nobler pleasures than those which proved so
attractive to Mr. Elmore, her fiance. Her aspira-
tions for high and beautiful ideals found rich
satisfaction in the finer and more artistic pur-
suits.
She was sitting thoughtfully by the window,
looking out at the grey clouds that chased each
other across the sky like a troop of h«adless

<#PG# 83>
ghosts. Her profile was, perhaps, lacking in the
classic lines which esthetic laws prescribe for
beauty; but a rich spiritual life gave an indescriba-
ble charm to her pale countenance.
Her large, meditative eyes seemed shadowed
today by a deep melancholy. However she tried
to fix her thoughts on George Elmore, the com-
panion of her childhood, to whom, at her parents'
wish she had engaged herself, today she found it
impossible. Always there arose from the depths
of her memory the face of a shy, gentle youth
with light, curling hair and deep searching eyes,
and the vision made her tremble.
Chance had made them acquainted at the Art
School. She had been trying, unsuccessfully, to
reproduce the luminous expression of a saint. Her
neighbor, watching her conflict with her difficult
task, showed, in his shy fashion, his willingness
to be of use to her. With a few strokes of his
brush he succeeded in catching the desired ex-
pression, and at the same time gave her in a hesi-
tating voice an explanation of the picture, and its
purpose. He spoke of the light effects which he
considered an erroneous conception on the part of

<#PG# 84>
the painter, while the next picture, belonging in
part to the school of Rembrandt, reached a hap-
pier effect from the depths of the shadows in one
place and the heightening of the light in another.
From that time on they worked for hours side
by side, he explaining the lights and shadows of
each picture with such fullness of comprehension,
such a thorough knowledge of history, literature,
and art, as to make a deep impression on her mind.
Her two years' sojourn in Germany had not been
able to efface these art-school recollections. She
did not know his name, to say nothing of his social
position and still—she could not forget—
even now she thought of him—even now his pic-
ture thrust itself between her and her fiance.
Involuntarily she sprang to her feet to escape
those torturing thoughts. Her attention was
caught by the sound of low sobbing. She was able
to observe through a crack in the partition the
distress of poor Mrs. Martin, as the clerk refused
her admittance into the manufacturer's private
office.
Broken with discouragement and suffering,

<#PG# 85>
Mrs. Martin had scarcely closed the door behind
her when Lucy entered the office.
"Who is that sobbing woman?" she asked has-
tily of the clerk.
"That woman? She is the wife of the former
foreman, whom—the strikers—handled somewhat
roughly," he answered, hesitatingly, dropping
his malicious eyes.
"She wished to speak to papa, didn't she?
Why didn't you let her in?" she demanded, frown-
ing.
"Because I had strict orders not to let anyone
in today," he replied shortly, suppressing his re-
bellious feelings.
'' Then I must hurry after the poor woman and
ask her if there is anything I can do for her,"
murmured Lucy with quick decision, taking up
her hat and cape from an adjoining room.
"I suppose the distinguished Mr. Martin's
last dollar's gone," sneered the clerk after her
in an Irish accent.

<#PG# 86>
III.
Lucy hastened after Mrs. Martin, who was still
visible in the distance. As the deeply tried woman
closed the door of her modest dwelling, a light
step made her turn and open it again. She gazed
with surprise into the face of the elegantly-gown-
ed girl with the gold-rimmed glasses.
"Does Mr. Martin live here?" the girl inquir-
ed in a doubtful voice.
"Yes. Will you be so good as to walk in?"
answered the astonished woman. And then with
a glance into the room—"Eugene, a lady!" she
called to her son.
An inner door opened and Eugene Martin ap-
peared. They stood speechless, gazingjn confus-
ion at each other, while white and red chased each
other over both of their faces. It was perfectly
obvious that they were not strangers to each other;
indeed, they had often painted side by side at the
Art School. It was the same shy, gentle youth
with the dark speaking eyes who had occupied

<#PG# 87>
more of her thoughts than would have been con-
sidered advisable for an engaged girl. Neverthe-
less she struggled to conceal her excitement, and
to appear calmly in the character of the purpose
which had brought her. But how could she offer
alms to this family? No, it would no longer be
possible; her sensibilities revolted at this thought,
and for the moment she wished even to conceal
her name from them.
"I wished to have a picture of my—" she was
about to say,'' of my fiance,'' without really think-
ing of him in the least, but a flame of red over-
spread her face and the word died upon her lips.
"—of myself," she substituted. "And I wish it
done in oils," she went on in a firmer tone.
Eugene conducted the visitor to the scrupu-
lously clean, though modest, little parlor. In or-
der to reach it they were obliged to pass through
the room where his father lay ill, the wild fancies
of fever playing antics in his brain. Lucy threw
a glance of deep sympathy at the sufferer, visibly
moved at the sight of his hollow, ashen face.
The great interst she displayed and the anx-
ious inquiries she made about his father's illness,

<#PG# 88>
filled Eugene's heart with gratitude. He could
have knelt before this being from another sphere,
to whom he had scarcely dared to raise his eyes,
and thank her in that humble way of his for the
warm sympathy she bestowed on his sick father.
"I have seen some of your paintings, and—
I am quite sure that my portrait will be a suc-
cess—" began Lucy, stammering again, as she
looked at the sketches displayed about the room.
"I should, of course, do my best—to—keep
your good opinion of my capability," answered
Eugene, with downcast eyes and a hesitating
tongue.
Lucy had taken up a portfolio and was turn-
ing over its contents, simply to avoid having to
meet his glances. She was afraid he might read
what was passing in her mind.
"But whether I should be able to satisfy a lady
who has so much artistic knowledge—I hardly
know," he admitted modestly, "for of late I have
not been able to do much except this landscape."
He indicated a picture which hung at the other
end of the room, wondering at the flush which had

<#PG# 89>
=
overspread Lucy’s face as she bent over the port-
folio, her blood tingling to her finger's ends.
She put down the treacherous portfolio hasti-
ly. The exposition of the secret hidden within its
covers made her tremble. One of her own draw-
ings, which she had probably thrown away, sud-
denly met her eyes. It had been enriched by a
border of blue forget-me-nots, and as she drew it
forth from one of the side pockets she saw, under-
neath it, written in Eugene’s hand, the single
word: “Unforgetable.”
Her heart beat loudly; still she retained self-
command enough to ask in an indifferent tone,
when he would be ready to begin the sketch for the
portrait, at the same time examining the picture
to which he had drawn her attention.
“I should like to know, also, what your price
is to be for the execution of the picture,” she said,
raising her eyes timidly.
He would have been glad to avoid any mention-
ing of the question of money, but when she insist-
ed, in a hesitating voice, he named a small amount.
“I believe it is customary to pay half in ad-
vance,” Lucy went on with an embarrassed smile,

<#PG# 90>
handing a fifty-dollar note to the confused Eugene,
in spite of his shy protest that he was not in the
least hurry about it.
After the day and hour had been fixed for the
first sketch of the portrait, Lucy returned to the
factory deeply gratified that she had found a way
to help the poor woman in her distress. Her
father, immersed in business, had scarcely noticed
her absence. She would have liked to tell him
something of the poverty and illness of his old
foreman, but an indefinable feeling of shyness
kept her silent. The factory was closed on the
same day.
Poor Martin's condition grew visibly worse.
On the doctor's recommendation, he was trans-
ferred to the neighboring hospital, and the afflict-
ed family reconciled themselves to the inevitable.
Although the poor wife had tended him day and
night with never-varying devotion, she could not
but admit that she was not in a position to give
him all that was required by the physician's direc-
tions.
Eugene, now the only support of the family,
was obliged, in default of anything better, to

<#PG# 91>
take to retouching pictures for photographers.
This ill-paid mechanical labor was beginning to
have an injurious effect upon his imagination. The
day-dreams which had filled his whole soul, antici-
pating his going to the Eternal City, to receive
there the artist's consecration by studying the
great masterpieces, he now saw vanishing into
comfortless vacuity, replaced by nothing better
than the dreamy monotony of earning his daily
bread by hard and uninteresting work.
Lucy's meteoric appearance, however, had
filled the darkened spirit of the young man with
a cheering light. With fiery eagerness he began
sketching the dear face which he had never been
able to forget. The laboring mechanic disappear-
ed, and the artist, once more awakened, felt his
genius glow again with the desire to create. This
girl, the very sight of whom made him trem-
ble with joy, must not be allowed to lose her faith
in his talent—his artistic capacity. In her eyes
he wished to be that, which his dreams had prom-
ised he should be—a real artist, even if he were

<#PG# 92>
obliged to strain his powers to the very limit of
the unattainable.
At the appointed hours Lucy came, bringing,
like Schiller's 'Maiden from a foreign shore,' val-
uable gifts for his mother, with fruits and toys for
the children. To Eugene, however, she brought
the most fatal gift—a ray of that unsurpassable
bitter-sweet pain which men call love, and which
often ends only with life. After she had left the
house all trace of her vanished; none of them knew
whence she came or whither she went.
With each sitting Eugene grew into a condi-
tion of more blissful intoxication, although Lucy,
in her refined unapproachableness, gave him not
the slightest excuse for such a feeling. Only once
he felt her thoughtful eyes resting upon him with
an expression which sent the blood coursing mad-
ly through his veins.

<#PG# 93>
IV.
One day when the picture was almost com-
pleted he received the following lines from her:
"I am going with my mother to Palm
Beach, where we expect to spend a month
or two. If my portrait is done before I
come back, kindly send it to No. — Fifth
Avenue. Remember me to your dear
ones. LUCY."
A check was enclosed for the balance of the
stipulated price.
Eugene felt an icy breath sweep over the glow-
ing love which filled his heart, like the freezing
north wind which brings death and destruction
in its train, blowing over land and sea and carry-
ing all before it. His artistic powers to strive
for the heights of ideals seemed broken; he had no
energy left. All was dark and gloomy within
him.
'' She is rich and I—oh, so poor!'' was the
thought incessantly in his mind.

<#PG# 94>
In his present position as sole support of his
family he could not long give himself up to such
unfruitful emotions; he must work in order to
provide bread for his mother and the children.
And so he tried by hard, incessant labor, by con-
stant occupation, to forget the sweet dream of his
brief, imaginary happiness. A bitter feeling of
depression rose in him at the thought that the
richly-dressed lady must consider him a fool,
puffed up with artistic pride; that she thought of
him, if at all, with a pitying smile at his presump-
tion.
Thanks to the skillful medical care which Mar-
tin shared at the hospital, he was soon on the road
to recovery.
"You will have to get uaed to the idea of hav-
ing a lame husband the rest of your life," he would
say smilingly to his wife, who visited him daily.
"If only your love isn't lame, we shall be all
right again," she answered him with simple af-
fection. He wiped away an unobserved tear, and
pressed her hand with emotion.
Eugene grew pale and nervous. Seeking for-
getfulness in his work he labored day and night

<#PG# 95>
with unwearying diligence, allowing himself no
time for rest. In the brief pauses he was obliged
to make it obvious, however, that he had not en-
tirely succeeded. Something of pain, of untold
suffering, would then steal over his weary face.
The nervous strain, continued for weeks, together
with the hardly repressed mental conflict, began,
little by little, to undermine his constitution, nev-
er of the strongest.
It was just a week after his father had left the
hospital (with one leg shorter than the other but
otherwise in good health) that Eugene fell faint-
ing at his work. In a day or two a severe nervous
fever developed. His parents, horribly frighten-
ed, did all in their power to aid his recovery.
Martin, though still weak, made haste to hob-
ble to the factory, which, on the termination of
the strike had opened as usual, to try for his for-
mer position.
"Is Mr. Denison here?" he asked of the book-
keeper, who was a stranger to him.
"Mr. Denison has gone to Florida—the date
of his return is uncertain," answered the book-
keeper, returning to his interrupted occupation

<#PG# 96>
without paying any more attention to the white-
faced cripple who stood leaning against the desk.
"My name is Martin, and I used to be in
charge of the dyeing department here,'' persisted
the anxious applicant, resolved not to be dis-
missed so easily.
"Every place is filled now, and well filled,"
said the book-keeper with a trace of irritation, not
looking up from his big ledger; "and anyhow,
you may be quite sure there will be no change in
the staff as long as the boss is away.''
Crushed and despairing, Martin tottered out
of the office. But full of confidence in his ability
as a dyer, he decided to go to another factory and
offer his services.
His sad, depressed appearance, however, was
no good introduction in a place where only strong
hands were looked for, so nothing but disappoint-
ment awaited him at the other places.
"The strike has ruined business," said one of
the manufacturers, while another laid the blame
on over-production. "Come in some other day,"
said a third.
During all these unsuccessful attempts to pro-

<#PG# 97>
vide the means of subsistence one week after
another slipped away. Now the lack of the bar-
est necessities stared them in the face—bitter
need, upon whose hideous features they had not
before been forced to look.
And Eugene, in the delirium of his fever, was
always talking of the inaccessible maiden from
another sphere. His clear-sighted mother began
to grasp the meaning of all this with anxious fore-
boding.
"What's to be done? What's to be done!"
the poor cripple asked himself, wringing his
hands, when he was notified that unless he paid
his back rent within twenty-four hours, he and his
family would be put into the street.
With despair in his heart he hastened out, and
sold everything of any value that was yet left to
him in order to avoid this disgrace.
"And then we'll get out of this unlucky
street!'' cried the mother, sobbing and wiping the
hot tears from her eyes.
After a short family council it was decided to
move over to New York.
"No one knows me there; I can get any kind

<#PG# 98>
of employment in New York—and work is easier
to find there than it is here,'' said Martin to com-
fort his sobbing wife.
A week later found the sorely-tried family in
one of the great barracks of tenements in the
lower part of the city. As a whole, the neighbor-
hood could not be surpassed for lack of comfort,
and little more appeared in the three bare rooms
tenanted by the Martin family.
Eugene's condition had improved, although
he was still confined to his bed; but the poor fath-
er's mind was even more tormented by the fearful
spectre of poverty, and yet—in busy, populous
New York, surely, there was work to be found!
He was going upstairs one day when he was
stopped by a woman who was a stranger to him.
She opened an adjoining door, and asked him to
step into the room. Her husband was lying there
sick in bed and groaning with pain.
"Excuse me," began the woman, "my hus-
band is a street-cleaner—he sweeps Fifth Ave-
nue," she added, with a proud intonation. "For
twenty-five years—mind that—he had done his
duty; and now the commissioners send for him

<#PG# 99>
today and here he is, sick in bed and can't sweep
his Fifth Avenue!" She went on with great lo-
quacity, without paying any heed to the embar-
rassed face of her new neighbor.
"If you will take his place I will give you his
whole day's wages!" she shouted, handing him
the money together with the broom.
Martin was unable to resist the fascination of
coins so badly needed. The other street-cleaners
were waiting down stairs. After the robust wo-
man had communicated the whole affair to them
through the window they took Martin into their
ranks without any waste of words and marched"
on before he had time to realize where he was go-
ing. Pressing his hat over his eyes he hobbled
along with them as well as he could, while actual
tears rolled down into his grey beard.
But the thought of coming home at night with
the money he had earned soothed him to some ex-
tent. His family need never know, and he was
not acquainted with another soul in the great city.
How sorely he was hurt by the knowledge that
his former employer's wife had seen him at this
undignified occupation is already known to the
reader.

<#PG# 100>
V.
On the evening in question Lucy was unusually
quiet and absorbed. She had scarcely seemed to
understand the loving words whispered in her ear
by her lover who sat beside her; she was obliged
to force herself, even, to return monosyllabic an-
swers to his questions. Her thoughts were else-
where. She had only been back from Palm Beach
a little while, and had heard nothing from the
family in which she was so much interested. But
her busy imagination depicted the well-known
room which contained the portfolio which had
played such a part in her life; and Eugene's fair,
curly head, and glowing, longing glances. Then
once more, she saw his father with the broom—
the almsgiving scene. Her thoughts were inces-
santly occupied with the son of a street-cleaner!
A burning flush of shame overspread her pale
face, which George Elmore accepted as the answer
to his tenderly whispered entreaties that she

<#PG# 101>
should become his wife at once, and kissed her
hand repeatedly.
The son of a street-cleaner to thrust himself
between her and George! Being what she was—
a proud woman and an heiress, she was startled.
"How could I so far forget myself!" she re-
flected. "Heavens! if George were to suspect!"
She tried her best to drive away the em-
barrassing—nay, the dishonoring thought. The
idea struck her as ludicrous—horribly ludicrous,
and that disturbed her even more.
Obviously there was but one way out of this
labyrinth of tormenting thoughts—to \marry as
soon as possible. She had a mind to say the deci-
sive word this very evening and appoint, finally
the day for the wedding. As George's wife she
would find rest and healing for her stubborn heart
in the fulfilment of her duty, and be able to realize
how foolish it was to allow it unlimited play out-
side the bounds of reason. In the meantime the
poor family must be helped. In spite of the found-
ations of reason which she had just laid, she felt
an interest in them.
"Nonsense! It is nothing but sympathy for

<#PG# 102>
those unfortunates," she tried to persuade her-
self. Tomorrow she would have a talk with her
father with a view to having Martin restored to
his old place in the factory. She would pretend
to have gained her knowledge of their circum-
stances from a friend who had employed their son
for a short time.
She could not, however, entirely suppress the
pricks of conscience which told her that her silence
to her father had delayed this restoration, and
had thus been responsible for the complete desti-
tution of these worthy people.
Three days later Martin received orders
through a workman in the factory who knew his
address to report there with a view to resuming
his former position. Accordingly great joy pre-
vailed in the Martin family. Eugene was the only
one now, weak and ill as he still was, to remain
gloomy and self-absorbed.
A gleam of happier feeling overspread his pale
face when he brought out Lucy's picture, now al-
most completed, and heightened the attractive-
ness of the cheeks, or made the thoughtful eyes
yet more speaking. And then he thought how,

<#PG# 103>
when it was all done, he would seek her out and
himself deliver it to her, and once more he re-
solved to allow the full fascination of her dear
presence to work its will upon him.
"And after that, I must avoid her—flee from
her! We must be as two stars which cannot tear
themselves from their own destined spheres, but
are forced to wander each in its own appointed
orbit," he murmured to himself with bitter pain,
gazing at the picture with unspeakable dejection.

<#PG# 104>
VI.
The delicious month of May had now come
round once more. Nature, awakening to life, put
on its wondrous robe of many colors, and the sun
in proud consciousness of its power to tempt with
the alluring warmth, the flowers concealed in the
mystic bosom of Mother Earth, shone with ever in-
creasing fervency. In Central Park Nature's
feathered choir poured forth its gay song into the
lovely spring air, while the perfumed lilacs lavish-
ed their scent upon all who came, caring not
whether the dweller in tenements breathed it in
greedily, or whether the superior residents of
Fifth Avenue ignored it contemptuously.
In the house of the rich manufacturer the per-
fume of the lilacs was not missed; the most
recherche hot-house plants supplanting them in
fragrance were artistically grouped on both sides
of the great staircase down to the front door, fill-
ing all the room with a perfume that bewildered
the senses. Servants in livery hastened busily, but
noiselessly, about, putting the last touches to the
585785

<#PG# 105>
decorations of the parlor for the wedding cere-
mony to be performed on this day. In the adjoin-
ing room a beautiful altar was visible, decked with
superb flowers from which festoons of myrtle ran
up to a hanging bell of red and white roses.
Carriage after carriage rolled to the door,
from which descended fair guests, arrayed in
splendid Worth and Felix gowns, while faultlessly
dressed gentlemen helped them to alight.
In her room upstairs stood Lucy, in a white
dress and gold-embroidered veil, with orange
blossoms upon her bosom. Although apparently
calm, she was deathly pale, and her heart, whose
feelings had been suppressed with so much diffi-
culty, betrayed itself by violent beating. A name-
less uneasiness was upon her, almost suffocating
her at times. Eugene's fair head and disquieting
eyes were before her mind vividly—now—when
in an hour's time she would be the bride of
another. More than once she was obliged to
have recourse to the smelling-bottle which stood
upon the dressing-table, in order not to give way
—to be strong enough to bear the torture of the
ceremony with dignified calmness.

<#PG# 106>
"The shock to my parents—the society in
which I move—no, no, there is no retreat for me!''
she murmured with decision in answer to her
heart's loud insistence. She was marrying
George in fulfillment of her parents' wishes and
also to escape from her tormenting self. That in
making this decision she had buried the ideals of
her youth—her life's happiness, no one should
ever guess. It was time now to steer boldly forth
into the deep sea of matrimony, deprived forever
of her life's compass.
Mrs. Denison, in a costly dres3, had repeatedly
opened the window and gazed with anxious impa-
tience at all the carriages that came from the low-
er part of the city, but she saw no sign of their
own carriage so impatiently awaited. Mr. Deni-
son had gone down town in the morning, promis-
ing to be back before noon, and now it was four
o 'clock.
Disquieting rumors had already begun to cir-
culate to the effect that the great banking house
with which their whole fortune was deposited was
on an unstable footing, owing to a rapid fall in the
stock market.

<#PG# 107>
Mr. Denison had said nothing of this to his
wife, although a horrible agitation had taken pos-
session of him, when, upon leaving the house he
had told the coachman to drive at full speed to the
banking house.
The guests were all assembled. The clergy-
man was waiting, but still there was no sign of
Mr. Denison. An uneasy whisper, an ever-in-
creasing impatience, could be noticed. Mrs.
Denison's thin face took on a feverish red. El-
more's father was just about to telephone down
town, when, at last the carriage rolled up to the
door. The coachman, excited with overdriving,
leaped from his seat and opened the carriage
door; but he had no sooner cast a glance into the
carriage than he uttered a loud cry, and with un-
steady footsteps, hastened to Mrs. Denison.
"Don't be alarmed, Mrs. Denison, please don't
be alarmed—" he panted in a trembling voice,
"The big banking house down town failed this
morning—and—it seems—Mr. Denison was so
fearfully upset—so fearfully—when he came out
of the bank his face was all red—and I heard him
say in a low voice that he would have to fail too!

<#PG# 108>
Yes—and now—please don't be frightened—he's
lying dead in the carriage!''
With a loud shriek, wringing her hands and
moaning, Mrs. Denison hastened to the carriage.
The gentlemen guests carried Mr. Denison's body,
still warm, into the house. "Heart failure," said
one to another. The women gathered around
Mrs. Denison, who was loudly weeping, and tried
to console her. Then one by one they stole away,
since it was quite obvious that there would be no
more thought of the marriage that day.
Lucy, worn out by weeks of mental agitation,
was overcome by the sudden shock of this sad
news, and fell back without a word upon the sofa,
gliding gently from it to the floor. A beneficent
unconsciousness clouded her perceptions. No one
had time to care for her; all the servants had been
sent right and left to bring medical aid for Mr.
Denison. All means of restoration were tried,
but failed to bring him back to life. '' Apoplexy,''
said the physicians, and silently left the house.
Meanwhile Lucy lay on the soft carpet without
a word or motion. In her dazzling white dress,
with the gold-embroidered veil, with the marble

<#PG# 109>
paleness on her face, she looked like a sculptured
goddess who had fallen from her pedestal.
The last wedding guests, those who had helped
to carry Mr. Denison up to his room, had just
driven away, sighing and shaking their heads as
they discussed the sad event. The stillness of
death settled over the house. Suddenly a sound
was heard as of soft footsteps drawing near.
Then the door of Lucy's boudoir, which had been
left ajar, was gently opened. A curly-headed
young man with a disturbed countenance appear-
ed upon the threshold, looking right and left with
admiring wonder. The front door was still stand-
ing open—no one had found time to close it.
Eugene, bringing Lucy's portrait, had thus
been able to penetrate unperceived, to the upper
story. Hardly able to believe his eyes, he gazed
at the fair form in bridal attire lying upon the
floor.
Startled and trembling in all his limbs, he was
about to close the door he had just opened, when
he caught sight of Lucy's face, pale as death,
through the veil. Hastily putting down the por-
trait, he darted to her side, and trembling with

<#PG# 110>

BE GAZED AT THE PAIR PACE IX BRIDAL ATTIRE.
LYING UPON THE FLOOR

<#PG# 111>

<#PG# 112>
intense excitement, caught her cold hands to his
heart.
"Miss Lucy! Miss Lucy!" he cried, at first in
a low voice, then louder and more anxiously—
but she still lay there, cold and apparently life-
less.
Distracted, he looked about for help. He
caught sight of the smelling bottle which Lucy had
already used so often. He seized it quickly, push-
ed aside her veil, and held it to her nostrils.
A slight tremor passed through the beautiful
limbs. Lucy moved her hand, but let it fall again.
Eugene sprang up joyfully. As if she had been
a feather he lifted the girl, now stirring a little. In
blissful intoxication, he clasped his heart's ideal
for one moment in his arms. Her breath played
over his face, making him tremble with delight—
carrying him out of himself, so that he pressed his
lips to her's, not knowing what he did. "How has
this bright creature filled my lonely life with sun-
shine!" he murmured sadly to himself, as with
a deep sigh he laid Lucy on the sofa.
And then,—he felt the soft arms suddenly
thrown about his neck. Lucy, still dazed and

<#PG# 113>
dreaming, had forgotten all about her wedding
day, and knew nothing of her father’s death.
Eugene’s words of love had roused her from her
death-like stupor; she was conscious only of his
nearness—of the intoxication of his kiss.
“Oh, Eugene,” she whispered, “what a lovely
dream!” She still lay with closed eyes. Eugene,
speechless with delight, pressed her passionately
to his beating heart. Lucy, startled, opened her
eyes.
Suddenly George Elmore, his eyes blazing,
stood before her, looking down upon her haugh-
tily.
Without losing his self-command in the least
he said with cutting scorn, “Oh, I am interrupting
a tete-a-tetel We have a lover, have we? Just
as well I have found it out in time! Ha, ha! I
wish you much happiness—especially as in my
own case my family would have to decline the
honor of an alliance with a bankrupt’s daughter l’’
Then he bowed coldly and went out.
Lucy, realizing the situation, uttered a cry and
attempted to rise, but once again overcome with
weakness, fell back with the same marble paleness
upon her brow,

<#PG# 114>
VII.
Mr. Denison's funeral had already taken place
some weeks. Nearly every day Lucy had been seen
dressed in deep mourning, crossing to New
Jersey. In her firm serious face decision showed
itself as, hour after hour she bent over big
ledgers, separating debts from assets, while the
bookkeeper stood by her side to offer her any
assistance in his power.
After a long and searching examination, it
became evident that the firm need not absolutely
declare itself insolvent, since the great banking
house in Wall Street whose reported failure had
brought the catastrophe to the Denison house-
hold, had recovered itself, thanks to a favorable
turn in the stock-market, and promised to reim-
burse all its creditors.
The Martin family, after all the severe trials
it had undergone in New York, had moved back
to New Jersey. Through the proved usefulness
of old Martin, who now labored with redoubled

<#PG# 115>
eagerness to produce new and unheard of com-
binations of color, the prestige of the factory,
which had sunk low in the silk market, now began
to rise again to its former height.
Lucy and her mother, selling their fine house
on Fifth Avenue, had also moved to New Jersey,
in the vicinity of the works, since Lucy insisted
upon superintending everything herself. She
trembled with impatience and joy when Eugene's
fair curly head was seen approaching the house.
On the expiration of her year of mourning she
gave her hand to the man to whom her heart has
long been given.
The happy couple spent their' honeymoon in
Italy. The high ideals which had once inflamed
the young painter's heart, and later had threaten-
ed to die out in comfortless annihilation, were des-
tined at last to take shape, and to stand before his
enchanted eyes in all their beautiful reality. At
last he was able, hand in hand with his beloved,
to admire the art treasures of Rome, the Vatican,
with its immortal paintings by Raphael, Michael
Angelo and Paul Veronese. All that they had
long known through copies and engravings were

<#PG# 116>
now before them in the original, and filled them
with delight.
Eugene availed himself of the permission
given to artists three days in the week to make
copies in the Vatican galleries. Standing at their
easels, Eugene and Lucy painted side by side, as
they had once done at the Art School, with un-
bounded happiness beaming in their eyes. Among
the masterpieces which represented the highest
ideals of art, Lucy realized more and more with a
palpitating heart, the omnipotence of true love.

<#PG# 117>

<#PG# 118>

<#PG# 119>

<#PG# 120>
A VIENNESE STORY
I.
Winter, hard and merciless as a tax collector,
stalked threateningly before the dilapidated doors
of Vienna's poor.
Back of the white Tanneries, not far from the
magnificently built Franz Josef's bridge, where
misery and dire poverty had made their dreary
home for many decades, winter seemed harder and
colder than elsewhere; for with the poor wretched
creatures who dwell near these Tanneries, there is
—as everybody knows—but little sympathy.
A sweet-looking girl, hardly fourteen years of
age, came shivering with bent head, out of one
of the poorest and dirtiest homesteads of the
poverty-stricken district.
Her thin, threadbare gingham dress, torn in
many places, exposed here and there the trem-
bling little form beneath. Over it she wore an old,
shabby-looking plaid shawl—apparently her moth-

<#PG# 121>
er's—which blown back now and again by the un-
ceremonious wind, exposed to view an old violin.
She held it as tight as if it were the only earthly
treasure she possessed. A ribbon, that had once
been blue, held up her knotted hair, and gave her
the appearance of a gipsy. And as for her shoes,
it would seem that only the upper part had pre-
served a right to the name; for her stiff-frozen
little toes were almost on the ground.
She walked on and on, greatly oppressed, giv-
ing no heed to the cruel wind that played havoc
with her fluttering curls. Her large black eyes,
which held a singular fascination in their spark-
ling depths, were now filled with burning tears.
She was barely on the threshold of girlhood,
but life in its unfathomable savagery, had already
thrown its challenging gauntlet in her frightened,
childish face. She felt instinctively that poor
little outcast as she was, she must not shrink from
battle, but struggle on as best she could either
with cruel wind and weather or with bitter cold
and want.
She had struggled bravely, never minding how
fruitless her little efforts seemed. But the one

<#PG# 122>
SALINE MOUNTAINS. 115
thing to which she had never accustomed herself,
and which made a storm of tears rain down her
pale face, was the frightful apparition of the hol-
low-eyed skeleton, hunger—that hunger which
now held sway over her sick mother's house.
A heavy, shuddering sigh broke from her
lips. The utter need and helplessness of her moth-
er and four smaller sisters, for days deprived of
all necessaries of life, even of bread to satisfy their
hunger, had driven her from the house, their cries
and lamentations still ringing in her ears.
"Poor and friendless, with no one to care for
us, and poor, dear mother lying ill," she moaned
in a suffocating voice, wiping tears of agony from
her white face. "It wrings my heart to see her
and the little ones so hungry," she said to herself,
sobbing aloud.
Near the Franz Josef's bridge she saw a little
tavern. She timidly opened the door and entered,
quickly producing the old violin. The instrument
was the only bequest of her dear father, who had
been a musician, and who had instructed her in this
art, detecting at an early age her ardent love of
study and thirst for a musical education.

<#PG# 123>
Standing near the open door, she first played
an obligato which she executed in masterly fash-
ion, and then commenced to sing an old German
song, so touchingly—knowing what was at stake—
that the people in the tavern, and many passers-by
who stopped in amazement at the door, gazed with
wondering eyes at the ragged little dark-eyed girl
hardly grown out of her baby shoes; and many of
them, moved by deep pity, though poor them-
selves, tossed one, and some of them two coins
into her apron. More they could not afford to
give, lest their liberality might eventually expose
them to the same plight.
Christine beamed with happiness. When her
song was finished, she quickly took out of her
apron her gathered treasure, counting it with
shining eyes. Twenty kreutzers—she counted
them again and again. Her stiff little fingers
could not hold all at once, but her eyes, wet with
happy emotion, were fastened on each of them,
and her heart leaped within her at the sight. So
many she had never before earned.
She folded her hands as if in fervent prayer,

<#PG# 124>
-
“HERE,
Miss, I AINT GOT No MoREY, BUT I'd LIKE
TER GIV YER THEM SHOES.”


<#PG# 125>
THE N
Y.
.' ",
.- HK j
PUBLIC
1
i .- >
: KY
A»iof,,
I
l»X
vm 1
TSLBtN (
. ■
K»A
rCSl.

<#PG# 126>
and lifted her dark eyes to Heaven in gratitude,
thinking of the joy she would bring to her mother
and half-starved sisters when she returned home
with an apron-full of fresh baked rolls.
"Say,—Miss—won't ye let me carry yer—
fiddle?"
The whisper sank into her ear. She turned
hastily around, and saw a poorly-dressed shoe-
maker's apprentice standing near, gazing at her
with his large blue eyes. In his hands he held an
old pair of shoes.
He stood, quite silent, with enthusiasm for
Christine's exquisite singing beaming from every
feature. Presently, with a timid grin, he held out
the pair of shoes.
"Here, Miss. I ain't got no money, but I'd
like badly ter give you them shoes—er—ter show
you that I like good singing. Yes, I do, an' ye
sing mighty well," he said, looking admiringly at
her and getting as red in the face as an over-ripe
apple. "I'll surely get a good cuff or two from
master for giving them away, but a shoemaker's
boy is used to that, and doesn't care a rap if once
in a while he takes a good piff, paff, pouff!"

<#PG# 127>
With this exclamation of Meyerbeerian bravado,
he demonstrated the operatic knowledge of an up-
to-date Viennese apprentice.
Christine looked at him with shining eyes.
She understood only one thing—that he wanted
to give her a pair of shoes, which, in her estima-
tion seemed almost new. She beamed at him so
gratefully with her large, dark eyes, that the em-
barrassed apprentice, who was about two years
older than she, felt a hot wave running down his
spine. Never had a lovelier face or sweeter eyes
smiled so kindly at the bewildered boy.
"They're yourn, an'—ye'd better try 'em on
—an' see if they'll fit," he stammered bashfully.
This strange, heavenly shyness was a new sensa-
tion for the rough apprentice lad. Until this
moment he had never known that there existed
such an organ as a palpitating heart within his
body.
And before Christine knew how, the new shoes
were on her feet. Shoes without holes! Good-
ness! how could it have happened? And without
holes!

<#PG# 128>
"I hope I am not dreaming," she murmured
to herself, her face aglow.
"Will ye let me go with ye?" asked the simple-
hearted boy, his eyes downcast.
"No—not now; but—on Sunday you can
come.''
"To yer house? My name is Peter," he re-
plied, greatly bewildered, as he could not think—
to save his soul—of anything more important
than his name.
"Yes, to my house; and then you can go with
me and carry the violin," Christine answered
with a sweet smile. But suddenly, ashamed of her
boldness, she stopped and counted her kreutzers
again.
Peter, however, looked at her with such ad-
miration in his big blue eyes, that something like
an electric spark shot through her. Such a happy
sensation she had never felt; for no one had ever
spoken such kind, encouraging words to her. A
tinge of red leaped into her pale cheeks; there
was a trembling pant in her voice, when, with
averted face, she told him the street and number.

<#PG# 129>
Tucking her violin under her arm, she ran quickly
up the street.
At the nearest bakery she stopped in order to
buy the coveted rolls. But Peter, still under the
charm of her large, expressive eyes, stood as if
rooted to the ground, gazing after her and listen-
ing to the receding tap-tap of the little shoes on
her feet, which he now realized belonged to some
one else. He began to dread the expected pun-
ishment, which he knew would be meted out, not
so much in curtain lectures as in striking actions,
and for some time he stood stock still, racking his
brain for an excuse to make their singular disap-
pearance plausible. But his natural light-heart-
edness soon got the better of him. Shrugging
his shoulders, and singing "Piff, paff, pouff,
brennet sie," he rushed away, ready to meet his
inexorable fate.

<#PG# 130>
II.
"Goodness! you haven't eaten anything all
day long, and I bet you're feeble," cried Mrs.
Langohr, the next-door neighbor of Christine's
mother, throwing the door of her miserable two-
room apartment wide open, so that all the neigh-
bors should hear, and praise her charitable incli-
nations. "0, my God, have mercy on them poor
little worms! I must go and make a little farina
soup for 'em. See, that's what I am getting out
of the Bible! Be good to yer neighbor," she said
in a loud tone, apparently for the benefit of the
poorly-clad and shy-looking women at the win-
dows.
1 * 0, holy Father in Heaven! Just look here,''
she screamed, amazed when Christine suddenly
appeared with twenty hot rolls in her apron, show-
ing them triumphantly to the neighbors. And
rushing into the apartment, she, with a gladdened
heart, distributed them among the starving
children.

<#PG# 131>
The feeble mother with eyes full of tears,
glancing thankfully toward Heaven, listened to
Christine's wonderful story about the shoes and
the twenty kreutzers. It seemed incredible. So
much happiness in one day! And Christine's
beautiful smile seemed to fill the squalid room
with radiance when she thought of Sunday and the
expected arrival of the shoemaker's bashful boy.
Her happiness increased day by day; for
every Sunday Peter punctually arrived, always
bringing some unusual delicacies with him, and ac-
cepting gladly Christine's consent to carry
the violin. In fact, he carried it with such dignity
and pride, that, standing behind her, it often
happened that he bowed his acknowledgment to
the audience at the end of each morceau, quite as
if he were her partner and one of the performing
artists. Then he would take his old cap and gath-
er the contributions, always returning them faith-
fully to Christine. Every piece of wood that he
could deftly worm out of his mistress' household,
he carried to Mrs. Miller, Christine's mother, to
warm the chilled little limbs of her starving chil-
dren.

<#PG# 132>
His mistress, the shoemaker's wife, often
wondered that the cooked potatoes disappeared
from the dinner table as suddenly as if the earth
had swallowed them up. She certainly could not
imagine that they invaribly disappeared into
Peter's side-pockets although his occasional
grimaces and the red spots on his sensitive skin
bore open testimony.
"Now, now, goodness! what's the matter with
you, rascal?" the surprised mistress would cry,
viewing amazedly his distorted face. And one
day, in spite of his Spartan heroism, Peter could
not stand it any longer.
"I am sick—stomach-ache—" he stammered,
vainly trying to compose himself, and even forc-
ing a sickly smile to his pale lips.
"You grown-up earthworm, you! The idea of
having stomach-ache every day at this time!'' she
responded angrily, adding a few choice words out
of her voluminous vocabulary. But being not bad
at heart, sympathy soon gained the upper hand,
and she said in a milder tone, giving him a small
coin with a gesture indicative of large liberality—

<#PG# 133>
"Here, you stupid nuisance, you! Go and get a
penny's worth of English bitters."
Peter did not require a second command to
leave the room. He took the hint and the penny
and went straight to Christine's house. But once
outside, and in respectable distance from his mis-
tress' observing eyes, he quickly removed the red-
hot potatoes from his pant's pockets.
Peter had always been accustomed to save the
tips that he received from his master's patrons
when he carried home their shoes—chiefly for
Sunday nights, that he might enjoy a seat in the
last gallery at the theatre. And my! hadn't he
been proud and happy when sitting there in his
best well-worn suit, and hearing those wonderful
songs, "Belle Helene," in Oppenbach's toneful
operetta, and others which he could not get out of
his head for months.
Sometimes, if he had any money left, he would
indulge in such luxuries as a half herring and a
glass of Pilsner, being a great gourmand. But
since he had come to know Christine, everything
seemed to have changed. He no longer went to

<#PG# 134>
the theatre, but saved all his tips, and went about
as if a secret were hidden in his breast.
"Oh, Mrs. Langohr," cried Christine's moth-
er, one cold morning to her next-door neighbor.
"Don't laugh, for it is true. Peter has bought a
dress for Christine, a winter dress, just
imagine!''
Mrs. Langohr held up her hands in amaze-
ment. But it was really true. Peter had bought
Christine, with his savings, a warm dress, at a
second-hand store. Christine was beside herself
with joy; she had never known in these days what
it was to have a warm rag on her back, and her
gratitude welled up and overflowed in her spark-
ling eyes.
As Christmas-time gradually approached,
Mrs. Miller, feeling much better in health, com-
menced to perform her household duties. But
Christine's earnings from her singing and violin
diminished as the holidays drew near, and the
simple little income seemed about to vanish
altogether. Even Peter's pour-boire money
threatened to cease, causing him restless nights

<#PG# 135>
and much down-heartedness. This discouraging
condition of things took all his former desire for
playing pranks out of the formerly gay-spirited
shoemaker's boy.
And when pious processions of tired pilgrims
passed through the streets of Vienna, singing and
praying on their way to church, he no longer
played any of his old mischievous tricks on them,
but took off his hat devoutly, and marched along,
praying with folded hands and wet eyes.
"Blessed Virgin—be good to her—I pray to
thee—but not for myself—no; only for Christine
—she lives under the white Tanneries—only for
her I pray!''

<#PG# 136>
III.
A chilling north wind whistled through the
deserted streets of the Austrian metropolis, and
the snow, towering mountain high, driven by the
gale, whirled blindingly around the muffled, shiv-
ering pedestrians, hastening hurriedly to their
respective homes.
The Franzenering, where the Viennese aristo-
crats are accustomed to meet in the afternoon
hours, to drink tea, consume little cakes and in-
dulge in gay conversations, to-day was totally
empty. No one, it seemed, had ventured to brave
the storm, in spite of the attractive display in the
show-windows of elegantly designed gowns and
hats. And these same show windows were cer-
tainly remarkable, for all adornments dear to the
feminine heart, wonderful achievements of unusual
millinery effects, dazzled the eyes of both young
and old.
Christine, holding her violin with stiffened
little fingers, stood pale and trembling before one

<#PG# 137>
of the most magnificent windows, speechless with
wonder, gazing as if in a trance at this modern
splendor of feminine attire, the like of which she
had never conceived even in her wildest, most
fantastic dreams.
Her heart contracted painfully. She thought
of her mother and little sisters, freezing, half-
starved, hopelessly expectant of Christmas, and
her glorious eyes blurred with tears, as she re-
membered that she, as the bread-winner of the
family, was not able to buy them anything for
Christmas, not even bread enough to satisfy their
hunger. For the first time in her life, she could
not think of God and Heaven without bitterness
for it seemed that he had indeed forsaken her and
her family.
"0 God, I thought I was doing my best," she
stammered with burning tears running down her
blanched face. "What have we done, that we of
all others, should die of hunger?" The future
stretched before her inner vision, a weary blank,
lit by no ray of hope. Convulsively, she clutched
the old violin, and wandered away, farther and
farther into the raging storm, drifting wherever

<#PG# 138>
the wind blew, without aim and without purpose
or hope.
The north wind in its increasing fury, com-
menced to batter tin roofs, chimney-tops, blinds,
awnings, flag-poles, as if a giant hand were at
work, while odds and ends of debris fell crashing
into the streets to bury themselves in the drifts.
Those unfortunates who were compelled to brave
the elements, fought their way onward like wild
beasts, cursing, shouting and screaming aloud.
Half-frozen, nearly blinded by the storm and
the hail that cut her delicate face like a knife,
Christine suddenly found herself before the open
portal of a palatial house. Driven by a momen-
tary impulse for shelter from the cold, penetrat-
ing blast, she entered. At once a ray of hope il-
lumined her desolate face. Now, if she were to
try once more, and sing for these rich people,
warm and comfortable behind those windows!
Quickly she withdrew her violin from its bat-
tered case, and began in quivering tones to sing
the Lorelei her father had taught her, before any-
one was aware of her presence. The wonderful
tones of her high soprano rang through the state-

<#PG# 139>
ly mansion, vibrating clear and penetrating all the
rooms.
"Here, here, the impertinence!" cried the ir-
ritated porter, jumping out of his porter's lodge,
pale with anger, and pointing to a sign conspicu-
ously hanging in the entrance of the spacious
porte-cochere. "How dare you, mean little bag-
gage, you! Can't you see that beggers and
organ-grinders are not allowed to enter here?
Heh! screaming at the top of her voice in such
weather! Get out! get out! quick! march!" His
tone was sneering, and his lips curled contemptu-
ously as he waved his hand disdainfully for her
to leave the courtyard.
Greatly frightened and trembling in all her
frozen little limbs, Christine was about to obey,
and covered her violin, timidly looking at the
porter's ugly red face, when suddenly a window
on the first floor was flung open. The elegant
form of a middle-aged man, with gold-rimmed
eye-glasses, leaning out of the window, gave the
porter so imperious a command to withdraw at
once, that the startled man, hardly daring to lift
his eyes to this illustrious personage, retired

<#PG# 140>
with many a bob and scrape to his porter's lodge.
Christine, greatly encouraged by this incident,
and anxious to use the opportunity, began to sing
anew; for she thought that if she won the favor of
the man at the window, it must surely mean help
for her sorely-tried family. So she sang the
Lorelei again—sang overpoweringly those lovely,
mystic notes—"Das hat mit threm singen die
Lorelei gethan."
The superb sound burst forth from the little
shivering form, rocked here and there by the rag-
ing storm, and seemed to breathe the longings
and distress of a pure childish soul. This piteous
appeal for help through the medium of Listz's
greatest legendary love-song, was not without ef-
fect.
"Superb—a phenomenon—a star!" murmur-
ed the man at the window in amazement. He
leaned out into the storm, gazing intently at the
young singer, for he was no less a personage than
Duke Holenlohe, the greatest musical critic and en-
thusiast in all Vienna. He withdrew from the
window, closing it with a snap.
Christine was speechless with joy, and her

<#PG# 141>
dark, glowing eyes flashed in excited bewilder-
ment when a richly liveried butler came down the
stairs into the courtyard, handing her five gulden
and demanding her address. She stood there—
her face flushed with wonder, and her childish lips
parted as if hearing the magic music of another
world. Cyclones of wind, thundering waves of
ice and snow were forgotten. Hope had entered
her heart, and with the five gulden clasped tightly
to her breast, she made her way out of the court-
yard, past the porter's lodge into the street. She
hurried along as best she could, her heart singing
a holy song of gratitude, and her lips smiling at
the thought of the happiness she was bringing to
those at home. The last part of the way she ran
and burst into the room where the family were
huddled over a few half dead coals, like a childish
almoner of plenty, stammering out her tale.
"It must have been the Lord holy, Jesus
Christ, who had mercy on me and my children,"
cried the invalid mother, trembling with excite-
ment, and folding her thin hands devoutly. "0
Lord," she continued, "most mighty and most
merciful Saviour of all the widows and orphans,

<#PG# 142>
accept the lowly thanks of a poor invalid." She
looked up to Heaven with a gladdened heart as
she saw her children happy, and for once, well-fed.
But Christine sat in a corner of the poorly
furnished room as if in a dream. A vague, con-
fused remembrance of all that had happened in
the courtyard filled her with bewilderment. The
only thing she really saw plainly was the joyous
faces around her, the result of her gift—the five
gulden she had received.

<#PG# 143>
IV.
The whole neighborhood was in an uproar.
A score of tongues were wagging, ears were
cocked to hear the news, and gesticulations and
cries were everywhere. Even the invalids of the
white Tanneries with their ridiculous looking
caps, stretched their shaky heads out of the win-
dows in order to listen to the great news related
by Mrs. Langohr, the wandering gossip-monger
of this poverty-stricken district.
"A real Count has heard her on Christmas
Eve, you say?"
"A Count! Naw! Something higher up,
smarty," snapped the gossip-monger, raising her
voice to a shrill pitch and throwing herself into
the proper attitude of importance. "It was a
Duke if you want to know it. Yes, he heard her,
and yesterday sent his carriage for her."
"His carriage!" echoed the crowd, and fell
back amazed, unwilling to trust their own ears.
"With four white horses attached to it,"
■v

<#PG# 144>
added Mrs. Langohr with a triumphant laugh.
"A girl from our suburb, imagine!"
"Hump! that's a greater miracle than the
stories of the returning Pilgrims from Rome,"
sniffed an old, wrinkled woman, shaking her ludi-
crously shaped head with a certain vehemence
and "soit disant" dignity which eminently befit-
ted one enjoying the reputation of the female
Socrates of the suburb.
The nightcaps at the windows commenced to
shake visibly, and a heated argument of possible
reasons for this exciting event followed.
"What will he do with her?" asked the female
Socrates with solemnity, wiping each wrinkle
separately with a dubious-looking red handker-
chief, a sign that she intended to cross-examine
everybody rigidly.
"What he—the Duke will do? He will make
a great singer out of her, smarty," sneered the
next-door neighbor, disappearing quickly indoors,
to the great disappointment of the neighbors who
had gathered for the purpose of hearing the great
news at first hand with all the details.
"A great singer?" asked the shaky nightcaps

<#PG# 145>
at the windows, with dubious smiles, ignorant of
what had gone before, and looking in blank amaze-
ment at each other. "Who—who is he?"
But so it had actually happened.
Christine had attracted first the attention, then
the interest of Duke Hohenlohe, and had been
placed in the Vienna Conservatory of Music. Here,
as a protege of one of its principal patrons, she
was being carefully instructed by the most promi-
nent singing teachers of the institution, and mak-
ing extraordinary progress.
But poor Peter! He had become so downcast
at the loss of his little friend, that he cared noth-
ing for even the merriest of his former pranks,
and spent his time in counting the days until he
could see her again. He had promised Christine
before she had gone to the Conservatory, to help
her family in every way he could, and what Peter
promised, he kept faithfully. But, oh! how dear
Christine had become to him—how necessary to
his very existence! He gladly deprived himself
of even the barest necessities of life in order to
be of service to her and the mother and sisters she
loved.

<#PG# 146>
Now—in the few months that she had been liv-
ing near the Conservatory, how tall and beautiful
she had grown, and what depths of expression lay
in her dark, speaking eyes! Goodness! the
simple-hearted shoemaker's boy felt his heart
leap and tremble, when he dared to look into their
sparkling wells of light, they followed him
whether he waked or slept.
He saw them in his grimy little shop, talked
to them when he was sewing on buttons, or knock-
ing vigorously at the hard, unresponsive leather,
and smiled happily at the visionary picture al-
ways before his mind's eye, to the great astonish-
ment of his observing mistress.
So five years sped by—five years which seemed
five eternities to Peter's love-sick heart. But
these five years had developed the pretty, sad-
eyed girl into a beautiful, graceful woman, with a
clever vigorous intellect, and an ambition to
reach the highest eminence within the grasp of
true womanhood and constant endeavor in the
world of song.
So there was but little time to give poor Peter,
as her approaching debut was near, and Christine

<#PG# 147>
studied night and day, with tireless energy, the
important roles which she would be expected to
portray.
In the meantime, dark clouds were gathering
on the horizon of the Austrian monarchy. Rebel-
lion after rebellion broke out on the southern
frontier of its vast dominions, and Peter, now of
age, was enlisted as a soldier, and sent away to
the centre of the insurgent provinces. He had to
march with his regiment in the darkness of the
night without even being able to see Christine to
utter a few parting words. He was heart-broken,
though what he wanted to tell her was not known
even to himself. All he knew was that he loved
her dearly, and that his tortured, love-sick heart
was writhing and bleeding at the thought that
months and months would pass before he could
again set eyes on her slender, graceful figure, and
lovely smiling face.
The ensuing scenes of war and bloodshed sick-
ened him; but Christine's hallowed picture, al-
ways with him, gave him strength to withstand all
horrors. She appeared as the radiant star of his
life, and he was guided in his loneliness by the

<#PG# 148>
single hope of seeing her again. Perhaps the ig-
norant simple lad covered his face and wept—
wept tears of despair and joy in anticipating that
inexpressible happiness which the future might
hold in store.

<#PG# 149>
V.
To the music-loving public of Vienna, first
nights and debuts of promising students are
great events, especially when the aspirants for
musical honors come from the home conservatory,
and more especially when a certain student of the
conservatory is heralded as a singer with a phe-
nomenal voice, which she will display in the fam-
ous role of Lucia di Lammermoor.
So it was that long before the doors of the im-
posing opera house were opened, eager crowds ex-
citedly discussing the appearance of the new sing-
er, stood at the entrance impatiently awaiting the
hour. And before the portals had been thrown
open half an hour, the great house was filled to
suffocation.
Many of the Austrian nobility sat in their
private boxes, and those persons belonging to the
aristocracy occupied seats in the parterre and, in
fact, every available place. The people, danger-
ously crowding the galleries, looked in open-eyed

<#PG# 150>
wonder at the stage where Christine, in the cos-
tume of Lucia stood trembling with shy timidity.
A vague terror overshadowed her lovely features.
She was endeavoring heroically to enter into her
role, but the sight of so many people, whom for
the first time she saw assembled, and the count-
less number of eager eyes riveted on her, made
her dizzy. She lost her courage, and stood there
helpless and frightened with downcast eyes, un-
able to commence, in spite of the fact that the ner-
vous stage manager in the wings had already
twice given her the cue.
The director of the conservatory stood in the
wings at the opposite side of the stage, and nodded
encouragingly to her. But as she seemed not to
see him, he became livid, and wrathfully com-
menced to revile himself for having yielded to the
temptation of bestowing this difficult role on Duke
Hohenlohe's protege, who evidently was not suffi-
ciently trained in self-control to appear as an in-
dependent star.
Just at the decisive moment, however, Duke
Hohenlohe entered the proscenium box and smiled
kindly at her. Christine's fiugers closed spasmod-

<#PG# 151>
ically over each other. She perceived at last
what was at stake.
With eyes full of tears, she controlled herself
by a superb effort, and looked up at him as if
saying: "You may trust me. I shall be equal to
the situation,'' and then she began to sing, at first
timidly and tremulously, but soon carried away
by the grandeur of this passionate role, she sur-
passed herself; her high notes echoed through
every part of the vast opera house with such daz-
zling magnificence, that an uproarious "Bravo,"
rang vociferously forth from thousands of voices,
and thousands of hands applauded wildly.
And when she had rendered the great bravura
aria in the second act, with rare perfection, a con-
tinuous storm of applause greeted her. Duke
Hohenlohe smiled with gratification. He was in-
deed proud of his little protege, whom he had dis-
covered in the blinding snow storm.
The director of the Conservatory, still stand-
ing in the wings, could not believe his eyes and
ears. Christine was not only a great singer, but
she had proved herself a great actress. The man-
ner in which she had portrayed the mad Lucia was

<#PG# 152>
an immense surprise. Flowers and bouquets of all
sizes and colors flew from all directions upon the
young debutante. Curtseying timidly, her lovely
face flushed and happy beyond description, she
looked at the corner in the second gallery where
Mrs. Miller sat praying with folded hands, as if
in a trance.
"Mother—dear Mother," she murmured to
herself, with profound humility, and disappeared.
The Duke Hohenlohe had just entered the im-
perial box where sat the Emperor. With a rever-
ential bow, and a look of great satisfaction on his
noble face, he said smilingly:
"Your Majesty, it was I who discovered the
new star."
"Indeed? Tell me how," responded his
Majesty, greatly interested.
"I happened to listen to her singing on Christ-
mas Eve. She stood in my courtyard with an old
broken violin and shivered with cold; and when
she sang the Lorelei, the snow circled around her
wretched little form. It was a pity."
"Duke, you have aroused my curiosity. Can
I— f"

<#PG# 153>
"See her? Oh, your Majesty—the great
honor— she will be overwhelmed," the Duke re-
plied, bowing deeply as he withdrew from the im-
perial box.
An instant later, Christine, greatly confused
and flattered by the request of the Emperor, stood
in his presence and received his hearty congratu-
lations. As if in a dream she glanced at the
second gallery where her mother still sat, and
wept tears of joy. The Emperor cordially ex-
tended his royal hand, which she was permitted to
kiss before retiring. The following day the suc-
cess of the new star as Lucia was heralded over
the city. The leading journals contained long ar-
ticles about her magnificent rendering of the diffi-
cult role, and the beauty of her voice, at the same
time, complimenting the committee of directors of
the Imperial Opera House for this opportunity
given to native talent, thus making an exception
to the general rule that prophets are not recogniz-
ed in their own country.

<#PG# 154>
VI.
"Your first appearance was a triumph that
will five in the memory of Vienna, my dear Chris-
tine. In fact, your magnificent rendering of a
role which only such singers as Patti, Sembrich
and Melba have attempted, has exceeded all ex-
pectations. Candidly, I had commenced to blame
myself for having yielded to the wishes of Duke
Hohenlohe," said the director of the Conservatory
with a radiant smile, as he entered Christine's
simple four-room apartment, a day later. "And
I am most glad to have been commissioned by the
Board of Directors to offer you a three years' con-
tract with a suitable salary—but, my dear girl,
what is the matter?"
Christine stood before him pale as a ghost. A
slight tremor shook her slender frame, her eyes
were downcast and red with weeping. She stam-
mered a few words which the director could not
understand.
He scrutinized her face sharply, being wholly

<#PG# 155>
puzzled, as he endeavored to fathom the true
cause of this state of mind.
"Pardon me, my dear girl, if I express my sur-
prise. I hope you are not dissatisfied with your
debut. "Why, you ought to be singing rhapsodies
—be filled with ambition and enthusiasm—after
being received by his Majesty and complimented
upon your remarkable success.''
Without replying, her lips quivering and
dumb, Christine slowly and solemnly opened the
door of the adjacent room. A mysterious, oppres-
sive something seemed to fill the room like the
shadow of death.
In the centre was a catafalque, at the end of
which stood two lighted candles, sputtering light-
ly like the last feeble shrieks of a departing soul.
Near the catafalque, on a small pedestal, rested
the picture of poor Peter, embedded in a mass of
roses.
The autumn sun, shining through the lilac and
myrtle boughs that rustled close to the window,
glinted over the pure, pale face of the singer.
Mournfully, her tearful eyes sought the object of
her deep devotion. On a black velvet cushion near

<#PG# 156>
Peter's picture, stood a pair of old shoes sur-
rounded by jasmine and white camelias. A ray
of sunshine stealing through the myrtle leaves
made golden ripples on the shoes.
Christine pressed her hand to her heart, as if
beholding that scene in the tavern of her child-
hood days. "Not yesterday," she said to the
director in a trembling voice—"not yesterday,
but five years ago I made my debut as a singer,
when I earned these shoes in recognition of my
singing—from him—" She pointed to Peter's
picture, almost overcome by emotion.
"I sympathize most keenly with you, but my
dear girl, what are they?"
"They are my only mementoes of my dear
friend Peter, who lost his life in the service of the
Empire—the first victim of the terrible rebellion
at the Southern frontier. She stopped, unable to
continue, while her heart contracted painfully, and
big tears of sympathy and love for the shoe-
maker's apprentice trickled down her blanched
face.
# # * # #
Christine is now one of the greatest opera stars

<#PG# 157>
on the horizon, and her sisters are following in her
footsteps. But every year when the sad day of
poor Peter's death comes, Christine, clothed all
in black, goes out to the cemetery with flowers in
hand, and sits for hours under the pure white
marble obelisk where, in gilded letters, these
words are traced:
ERECTED IN HONOR OF PETER STARK,
By his devoted, sorrowing friend,
CHRISTINE.

<#PG# 158>

<#PG# 159>

<#PG# 160>
AN ITALIAN NOVELETTE.
Many large and small boats were dancing mer-
rily on the Bay of Castellamare, so richly popul-
ous with many rare species of fish. The mirror-
like blue surface was only ruffled by the small
steamers on their way to and from Sorrento,
carrying throngs of pleasure-seeking tourists
from all parts of the world.
On the right hand shore, extended on a high
promontory receding a little from the shore,
stands peacefully dreaming and forgotten, by the
outer world, the little village of Vico Ecquenso.
The innumerable small fishing smacks belong-
ing to the villagers ("paesani") dot the bay as
far as Castellamare, and every morning they make
their way thither, carrying to market their night-
ly catches of tunny fish, anchovies and other dumb
subjects of Neptune.
The valleys, perfumed throughout their length
with odorous herbs, palms and gigantic cactus in
wild profusion, change their character a little

<#PG# 161>
further away, by taking on the indescribable charm
of the picturesquely draughted olive trees, which
often slope down to the water's edge, while on
green hillside terraces most magnificent grapes
gleam from afar, like red glittering rubies to the
eyes of the delighted tourist.
On the left side, amid palms and chestnut
trees, one catches a glimpse of the lifeless unroof-
ed ruins of Pompeii, once a populous city, which
was overwhelmed by her mighty neighbor, the ter-
rible Vesuvius on the 22nd of August in the year
79, and remained under ground for about eighteen
centuries, until Charles the III ordered its excava-
tion on the 1st of April, 1748. Amid all these
buried treasures of art of long perished races,
Seneca had spent his youth and Cicero had written
his biting rhetorical masterpieces, which earned
him a sixteen months' banishment from the court
of the Emperor Claudius, whose gigantic statue
of Persian marble, in the robe of '' Pontifex Maxi-
mus" was lately excavated at Pesto.
* * # # #
The high mountains were already casting
long shadows through the little village of Vico

<#PG# 162>
Ecquenso, and the hot evening sun, now about to
sink into the gently splashing waves, gilded with
its last beams the weather-beaten, centuries-old
convent of Santa Croce, built upon a high summit
on green hilltops.
The peaceful sound of the old convent bell,
inviting those to pious meditations and evening
prayer, was sounding now with wondrous sweet-
ness over land and sea, even as far as the desolate
altars of the heathen Gods of Pompeii tumbled
down from their gilded pedestals, and the shrunk-
en mummies in the "theatrum tragico," where
the people perished without the help of the heath-
en gods, listened dumb and petrified,—the sight-
less eyes wide open,—to the sounds of the new re-
ligion calling them again and again morning and
evening. The vast oppressiveness of the ghostly
solitude there, contrasted strangely with the un-
common bustle perceptible that evening among the
simple minded inhabitants of the quaint little vil-
lage, who usually went so quietly about their work.
A joyous excitement sparkled in the eyes of
both old and young, who had assembled in front
of the only village tavern, "Osteria," to witness

<#PG# 163>
the approach of the festal procession of youth and
maidens coming home from the vineyards, laden
with baskets of grapes and flowers.
The wealthiest man in the place, the farmer
Niccola Gallioti, who had just before devoutly lit
six immense wax candles in honor of the Holy Ma-
donna, was today giving a feast to the young peo-
ple of the place. The ingathered harvest had filled
all his granaries to the roofs and so surpassed all
his expectations that it had to be celebrated with
eating and drinking, music and dancing. An hour
before, he had been seen walking up towards the
vineyards at the side of his beautiful daughter,
Concetta, and as yet there was no sign of their
return. The expecting crowd shufHed up and
down impatiently, and craned their necks.
"There! There! Corpo di bacco! they're
coming now," cried a small bare-footed lazzaroni,
greatly excited, running breathlessly to meet
them, and vainly trying at the same time to hold
up the torn, shapeless breeches, which actually
had no right to that name. They were fastened
by a cord on the top and reached from the should-
ers to his feet.

<#PG# 164>
All the inhabitants of the village seemed to be
present, and pressed forward in a confused mass,
each one anxious to be the first one to greet the
festal train, principally Galiotti the liberal host
and dispenser of the best wine.
In the rear, unobserved, stood a man of about
twenty-eight years, in an elegant summer suit, ap-
parently belonging to a better class, looking
sneeringly at the great excitement of the
"Paesani."
His dark, sparkling eyes, encased in blue-
shaded rings, had a demoniacal glitter. He was a
tall, athletic man, with a constant sneer on his red
lips. The fairly chiseled lineaments were blotted
by dissipation, and blackened and distorted by the
baleful fire of fierce passions. The bushy eye-
brows, that nearly met each other, were of the kind
to exercise an uncanny attraction upon trusting
innocent girls by looking into their depths.
The distant strains of three gaily-clad musi-
cians with fiddles and horns seemed to electrify
the crowd. The ragged youth began to dance, the
old paesani threw their shabby looking caps, in
the air, while the little barefooted lazzaroni, his

<#PG# 165>
face black with dirt, ran ahead of the anxiously ex-
pected procession, splitting his throat with shrill
cries of "Ewiva," and gesticulating frantically.
Only the tall gentleman, with a constant sneer
on his red lips, stood apparently unmoved in the
same place, gazing at the scene enacted before his
eyes with great contempt. Observing him at close
range one could perceive, in his dark sinister eyes,
the consuming fire of a sinful passion, a volcanic
fire it seemed, like that which rose and fell on the
summit of the neighboring Vesuvius, devastating
in its destructiveness.
He had seen the fair Concetta at Castellamare
for the first time, and since then he could not for-
get her lovely face; day and night it haunted him,
that merry, mirthful face that spoke of pure maid-
enliness. The sweetness and childlike pureness of
the girl's exterior attracted him. It was some-
thing new in his dissipated life, something he had
to conquer.
Even at the gaming tables of Nice and Monte
Carlo, and at the wild orgies carried on there by
the dissipated sons of nobility, he seemed to see
her standing before him, smiling sweetly, while

<#PG# 166>
her blue innocent-looking eyes shone at him like
spotless mirrors.
After a short time he had discovered that she
came twice a week to Castellamare, on Mondays in
her father's fishing boat, while on Saturdays in
the company of a- maid carrying stone pitchers to
the well, "Stabilimento," where six different heal-
ing springs gush out of the mountain side. When
the flames on top of the Vesuvius burst forth
vehemently illuminating Naples, Castellamare and
all other little hamlets far and near the springs
are overflowing with boiling water, but the mo-
ment the flame diminishes, the water grows cold
and gradually disappears.
The young rogue made good use of these days;
as if by chance, he always strolled along the same
path to the springs. If it rained, he was prompt-
ly at hand with an umbrella; if, on the other hand,
the sun shone down oppressively on the overheat-
ed Concetta, the same rescuer in need was at
hand again, gallantly offering his English parasol,
and always walking a little further with her. The
sunny nature of the young girl shone out of her
splendid blue eyes, bright and beaming as a May

<#PG# 167>
morning. She trusted every one, and especially
this handsome gentleman, who treated her always
with such exquisite courtesy, as if she had been
one of the daughters of the Lords of Torre del
Greco, whom she saw passing on the Corso di San-
ta Lucia, either on horseback or in a luxurious car-
riage. Who would be likely to have any evil de-
signs against her? Old and young loved her in
the village, and the poor and sick had learned to
bless her for three miles round. Having grown
up in her village home, and blossomed there like
a wild rose, she had only known one great sorrow
in her young life, that of losing her beloved moth-
er when she was very young. Her merriment,
her happy singing, brightened up the dark, lonely
house of the gloomy old man.
However, since she had made the acquaintance
of the gentleman with the ensnaring eyes, she had
changed greatly. She was often lost in amaze-
ment—though not in his company, but when alone
in her little bed-chamber, where the observing
eyes of her anxious father could not watch her.
There she sat, her large blue eyes staring out
of the window, with a feeling of overflowing joy,
**J;»£&

<#PG# 168>
that filled her heart, a feeling she could not
explain to herself, especially at his approach, the
violent beating of something within her that
threatened at times to take her breath away.
"Mia cara Concetta, I love you madly," had
he not long since whispered in her ear. He has said
that to her, the common-place daughter of the
"Paesano" Niccolo Galliotto. But his dark, pas-
sionate-looking eyes made her tremble. She did
not know why.
"If he could see me now in my new Sunday
dress!" she thought, her glance sweeping over the
crowd, as she passed along, surrounded by all the
youths and maidens of the village, in her red petti-
coat and bodice of black silk, with snow white
muslin sleeves. "There! Santissima Madon-
na." "He is waiting for me," she whispered
happily, while a blush brighter than the red silk
of her dress overspread her lovely face.
But not for all the bunches of red grapes she
was so fond of would she have raised her eyes, for
fear the youths and maidens might have read in
them the delight of her heart at seeing the man
she loved and was loved by such a man!—the vio-

<#PG# 169>
lent beating within her increased at this thought.
"Madonna!" She looked at the soft blue sky and
the waving cactus plants in the distance. Tears of
joy filled her eyes, while the golden sunshine filled
every nook and corner in Nature's great realm.
Arriving at the house, she found the maid
busily engaged in preparing the feast. The men
were beginning to place large tables in the garden
under the orange trees. Then they rolled out
large casks of the new wine from the cellar. Con-
cetta had just put on her apron, busily engaged in
carrying out a tray full of dishes into the gaily
decorated garden, when the door burst open. Her
father stood at the entrance, with his cap in his
hand, bowing reverentially to a gentleman, beg-
ging him to honor his house by entering and par-
ticipating in the general frolic of the day.
A loud crash was heard. Concetta recognized
him at once, the gentleman with the ensnaring
eyes, and, delighted as she was, had dropped the
large Sunday tray, with all the special dishes
which only appeared on the Sunday table for
special occasions. She was startled and happy
at the same time, and hardly heard the irate

<#PG# 170>
father's words of blame. The voice of the little
lazaroni was heard outside singing "Napoli
Bella.'' She looked through the window, and San
Francesco, on his pedestal, smiled at her. She
turned about, and met his burning glances. Her
cheeks crimsoned; she was in a confusion when
those dark fascinating eyes actually followed her
wherever she went.
He sat by her side at the table, calling her,
Concetta Gallioti, endearing names, and squeezing
her hand tenderly whenever the father was not
looking in their direction. And when she found
his eyes constantly fastened upon her face, she
felt like crying and laughing at the same time,
thought it looked as if she were even too shy for
that.
Her innocent face was like the clear water of
the Spring at Castellamare. He observed her
closely, knew the symptoms and smiled malicious-
ly, considering it an auspicious omen in his well-
tried loving-making scheme.
The evening breezes rose and sank solemnly
through the little green olive trees in the distance.
The tables were cleared away, the meal was over

<#PG# 171>
and the three grotesque musicians, who had been
feasting convivially, were sounding their instru-
ments with special vigor. The dance began. All
eyes were turned on Concetta, as she opened the
rustic ball with the interesting stranger beneath
the orange trees.
Her little heart felt as though it would burst
with joy in the consciousness that he had eyes and
ears for none but her, and scarcely seemed to see
the most renowned beauties of the village. The
whole evening he danced only with her—and what
things he whispered in her ear! Her fair cheeks
still clothed themselves in red—and the more they
did so, the more eloquent grew his lips and the
more terrifying in its passion his burning gaze.

<#PG# 172>
n.
At Torre del Greco, in his dining-hall with
its lofty windows, the Baron di Pavichino sat at
breakfast. His bushy eyebrows contracted dark-
ly when the long-expected visit of his nephew
Luigi was announced to him.
Luigi di Pavichino, the passionate lover of the
fair Concetta, now entered the room, pale and
weary-eyed. For four days he had not been seen
in the Palazzo di Pavichino, although not long be-
fore he had become engaged to his rich cousin.
The fear of exposing himself to her displeasure
now brought him here, after changing his clothes
for a little more formal attire than that in which
he had appeared at the peasants' festival, to ex-
plain his absence by a plausible story.
"Per Bacco! Lucetta was looking for you in
vain yesterday and the day before!" began the
old Baron sternly, plucking at his gray beard in
a way that betokened displeasure. "If you are
beginning already to provide such disappoint-

<#PG# 173>
ments for your future wife, my dear Luigi, then
it would possibly be more sensible to call the en-
gagement off while there is yet time."
Luigi trembled at these words of his wealthy
uncle. In fact, this marriage was his only plank
of salvation, to which he clung with desperate
grasp like a man fighting for life in the waves—
to which he must cling in order to bring any order
into his ruined financial position, which he care-
fully concealed from his suspecting uncle, and
which had to be retrieved as soon as possible.
The fact that the estate inherited from his
father, including farms and factories, was mort-
gaged up to the last cent, would have been suffi-
cient to jeopardize his relations to his unattrac-
tive but richly-dowered cousin. He knew the ver-
dict. A long-drawn sigh was the only answer he
gave to himself, and besides, there was his in-
capability of meeting his notes indorsed by
friends, falling due within a short time for con-
siderable amounts contracted at the gaming
table. Sums which had to be paid because they
were debts of honor, for which he pledged his
"parole d' honeur."

<#PG# 174>
"Forgive me, dear uncle," lie began stumb-
lingly, with these reflections in mind.
"I went to see the Padre at the Monastery to
tell him of my engagement and there—the kind
monk—the harvest—the new wine—
The weatherbeaten features of the old noble-
man took on a more cheerful expression at these
words.
'' Per bacco!" he began, smacking his lips and
winking slyly, "it must have been the new Lacrima
Christi wine I sent him last week, which has made
all the mischief. Ho! ho! if that's the case, my
dear boy, you will soon taste the wine that will
be worth the tasting,'' he added with a broad grin,
smacking his lips again in a manner attributable
to the thorough knowledge of an old wine gour-
mand.
"Yes, my boy, the same Lacrima Christi will
be served at your wedding next month."
The atmosphere was sultry, but he shivered;
and if a mirror could have been held before his
eyes he would have startled back alarmed from
the gray stony face so unlike his.
"Next month!" he stammered.

<#PG# 175>
Until now he tried to forget the whole affair;
her image was so utterly driven from his fickle
heart as if it were buried twenty feet under the
ruins of Herculaneum.
"Yes, my dear Luigi, I shall write at once to
Torro Annunziata, and then we will celebrate a
merry wedding and invite all—Why, what's the
matter?" he asked greatly bewildered. "What
a wry face you are making?"
"It is the pleasure—the unlooked-for sur-
prise,—" stammered Luigi with difficulty, while
his pale face grew a shade paler. The sweet face
of Concetta, with the bewitching dimples from
which little mocking Cupids seemed to peep out,
challenging him like a siren to a kiss; her silvery
laughter, her deep blue eyes like a fairy's—all
that came up before his interior vision with in-
toxicating strength, while the thought that in
four weeks he would be called upon to plight his
troth to his unlovely cousin made him shudder.
Still he was careful not to drop the veil that
hid his real thoughts so carefully in the presence
of his suspicious uncle.

<#PG# 176>

CONFESSING ALL TO THE WONDER-WORKING SAINT

<#PG# 177>
T1JE N'KW YOKK
PUBLIC LIBRARY

<#PG# 178>
1' Pleasure? Ho! ho! my dear Luigi, I thought
as much. Young men, young men! I have not
forgotten my own youth yet—a little wild it was.''
He chuckled half to himself, in a low voice.
"Can I—see my finance now?" Luigi asked, in
a half stifled voice.
"Now? So early? No, dear boy, she is still
among her pillows—dreaming of you! Per Dio!
today, though, is the great festival of Saint Cecelia.
Our good neighbors from Torre del Greco, Portici,
and Torre Annunziata will be sure to gather at
Castellamare. We must go. too. You shall go
with Lucetta in my victoria with the four fiery
Arabs, and I will follow the happy pair in a
plainer carriage," continued the old baron with
nods of pleasure.
It was at the same festival, at the chapel of
Saint Cecelia, that he hoped this very evening to
meet Concetta. The room seemed to spin round
him and grow dark. "By your leave, my dear
uncle, I must go at once to the club. You know,
the joyful news—"
"Of your engagement?"

<#PG# 179>
"Haven't you mentioned it yet to your
friends," he cried, a picture of wild-eyed amaze-
ment.
'' To be sure I have, but—the early date of the
wedding—" he hastened to reply in a dull voice,
wiping the cold perspiration from his brow.
Catching up his hat and cane, he took a hasty
leave from his Uncle, with the promise to come
back punctually at four o'clock. He rushed away
tortured by this dreaded thought in mind; but he
had to see the small army of creditors and keep
them at bay with their insolent demands for
money, which were becoming intolerable until
after the most dreaded wedding.

<#PG# 180>
III.
In Castellamare every year little shrines are
erected for the feast of St. Cecelia as far as the
Hotel di Stabia, which is close to the beautiful
bay of Naples, known to the tourists of all nations.
In these shrines, decorated with silken draperies
of different colors, immense wax tapers are burn-
ing, amid which roughly painted images of the
wonder-working saint are seen shining out merci-
fully in the brilliant afternoon sun.
She looked down with mild eyes, upon the de-
vout multitude, that hung up their votive offerings
of waxen hands, feet and hearts with tearful eyes.
Then deep in prayer they besought through her
the blessed Virgin's help for their various ills
and woes; kissing devoutly the silken drapery.
Concetta in her new Sunday dress stood there
among the praying throng. After praying for
a while she moved towards the Holy shrine; her
eyes moistened when she fastened with trembling
hands a little waxen heart to the drapery looking
up imploringly.

<#PG# 181>
She saw her benignant gaze, and knelt down,
confessing all to the wonder-working saint, and
besought her to heal her sick heart. She hardly
knew what oppressed her so, and what made her
so immensely happy, at the same time. To her,
woods and fields were indeed vocal, every flitting
bird and gurgling brook, every passing cloud and
whispering breeze brought messages of love from
him. To the mercy of God and the love of Christ
she now committed her love. Today in the bound-
less reverence and religious enthusiasm she felt
the need of his presence so much more.
She looked right and left. "Something must
have happened," she murmured to herself, great-
ly disappointed, as it was almost twilight, and no-
where was to be seen the tall imposing figure of
the fascinating man so dear to her. The sun had
gone down and the shadows of the summer even-
ing commenced to gather in the near forest, and
climbed, like trooping spirits, up the rocky moun-
tain side.
"He was always so punctual," her voice fal-
tered suddenly, and it grew dark before her eyes;
she trembled so that she was obliged to grasp

<#PG# 182>
one of the large candle-holders near her in order
to keep her from falling to the ground.
An elegant carriage with four horses had just
dashed by, in which she fancied she saw her lover
with a richly dressed lady; her heart contracted
painfully. Sadly, with downcast eyes praying
continually, she took her way back to the village.
Although with her pure and simple views of
life, there was no room for doubt in her loving
heart, still the disquieting thoughts that he must
be rich and of high position, she could not keep
altogether away. How else could he be driving
about with a signora apparently of nobility? In-
voluntarily, hot tears trickled down her red cheeks
out of the great blue eyes, like drops of rain from
a patch of blue sky.
When Luigi came to the village on the follow-
ing day he found Concetta's eyes swollen with
weeping. She scarcely dared to raise them, still
heavy with tears, to his face, for fear he should
read in them her great love for him.
Luigi Pavichino, the young roue, who had suc-
ceeded quickly enough with his flattering words
in making her forget the cause of her secret grief,

<#PG# 183>
now laughed lightly with a merriment that had
none too pleasant a sound, as if he were well used
to such scenes of jealousy. He called her his
dear little bride, whom he loved and would always
love, and therewith he kissed her rosy lips pas-
sionately, assuring her on his honor that he had
been driving in no carriage, but had been at the
monastery with the Padre, and then at five o'clock
had come to Saint Cecelia's shrine, without seeing
her.
The nearer the wedding day approached, the
oftener Luigi came to the village, assuring her al-
ways of the unchangeableness of his love.

<#PG# 184>
IV.
The old cloister of Santa Croce, with its classic
columns, had today a festive appearance. In front
of the garden, sloping down at the mountain's
side, one gets a glimpse at the river Sarno, where
the Porta di Stahia once was located, and the
image of Minerva in terra cotta—the guardian
Deity of Pompeii, was excavated intact, now in the
Museum at Naples.
The old chapel was gayly decorated with rare
flowers and tropical plants today, and the finest
adornments of the ancient cloister, which had
slumbered peacefully and been forgotten in their
cupboards for a century, were brought out by the
serving brothers, and cleansed and dusted of their
cobwebs. They whispered excitedly putting their
heads together, for the marriage of a high-born
couple was a rare event within these ancient walls.
The fat prior smiled in the triple folds of his
chin, on all the preparations, with quite unusual
benovelence. His little steel-gray eyes, keen and
shrewd in their glance, fairly sparkled as he

<#PG# 185>
thought of the rich fee which would come to his
cloister on such an occasion from a generous no-
ble house.
The cook of the monastery, Brother Salva-
tore, had some days earlier announced the festive
event to Concetta's father, who supplied them
with fish on fast-days. Concetta was quite child-
ishly delighted. A noble wedding—the handsome
pair—the rich costumes—all that she had never
seen in her whole life; so she teased her father
until he promised to take her to the wedding. Her
cheeks glowed, her big eyes sparkled with pleas-
ure, when she was sitting in the boat in her Sun-
day best and thinking of all the splendors that
were going to be exhibited before her.
"If I understood aright the look Saint Cecelia
gave me, I shall soon be standing there too!'' she
whispered to herself with a happy smile, while
her father sat opposite her and plied the oars
with accustomed hands. "Oh, the happiness, the
happiness of belonging to him!" she went on in
her whispered colloquy with herself, both hands
clasped before her face, blushing with maidenly
modesty.

<#PG# 186>
Gloomy clouds began to obscure the sun. The
magnificent landscape was in a few minutes
wrapped, as it were, in a dark veil of mist. With
shining eyes she sat in the boat watching the sky,
and drinking draughts of joy with which mingled
no drop of sin or selfishness in its crystal waves of
purity; for she had grown up with nature as ig-
norant as her plants at home, of the roar and
strife, the burning hate and cunning intrigue of
the great world of men and women.
Frequent puffs of wind made the boat now
tremble and rock. The fear of an approaching
storm had laid hold of the animal world as well;
the terrified sea-gulls flew wildly over Concetta's
head, while a hideous owl in the neighboring olive-
grove uttered its long-drawn, harsh notes, which
floated out over the river. Concetta saw and
heard nothing. Her thoughts were with the man
to whom she had given herself in almost superhu-
man love, whom she was tempted to adore like
the holy image of Christ before which she knelt in
lowly reverence, imploring His blessing on her
beloved.

<#PG# 187>
She heard the sound of the great bell, which
was only rung on great occasions; the nearer she
came, the more joyfully beat her heart. A gaily-
decked steamer lay already at the landing stage,
so that they had to go a little further in order to
land. They had no sooner found a place where
they could moor their boat than Concetta with im-
patient haste sprang ashore. They then climbed
the steep hill as quickly as possible. Great rain-
drops fell again, and began to wet Concetta's Sun-
day dress.
At last they reached the cloister; but they had
come near missing the ceremony. The solemn
tones of the organ were still sounding impressive-
ly through the chapel. Concetta, with shining
eyes and wet through and through, was standing
near the chapel door, contemplating the undream-
ed-of splendor of costumes of the high-born la-
dies. The bridal pair, surrounded by wedding
guests congratulating them heartily, were not yet
visible.
"Now! now!" there was a general movement
towards the outer door of the chapel.

<#PG# 188>
"Here they are coming now," whispered Con-
cetta with sparkling eyes full of expectation, to
her father, whose head was bowed reverently.
Everybody rushed on in order to have an advan-
tageous place when the bridal party passed.
Girls all in white came first, carrying bouquets
in their hands, and then Luigi—pale and haggard
—looking like a bad conscience personified; and
on his arm came the bride all in white!
Concetta saw and heard no more.
The tortured image of Saint Antoni in the en-
trance stared ghostly at her, dripping drops of
blood. The decaying walls of the old cloister tot-
tered about her, flames sprang up towards her
from yawning abysses; lightning shot across her
brain, and; Beelzebub with his infernal band
gnashed his teeth at her in a laugh of malicious
triumph.
She recoiled, dazed with awe-struck terror
without a sound, without a cry she moved unob-
served by the jostling crowd behind Luigi. Her
blue eyes wide open never turned from him an in-
stant, as if struck dumb by a horror too great for
words or cry.

<#PG# 189>
A little keen steel blade was glistening in her
hand, and the next instant Luigi was stabbed
through his treacherous heart. He fell senseless
at the feet of his newly wedded bride.
The frightened wedding guests, fearing a
fainting spell, rushed to him, but the blood was
now flowing freely from the spot where she had
stabbed him. Nobody saw her do it. He was
quickly carried into the monastery, followed by
the wedding guests.
Concetta uttered a wild cry, and rushed weep-
ing aloud down the hill towards the harbor. It
was already dark; the wind was now blowing with
the vehemence of a hurricane over the foaming
waters, and the roar of thunder shook the bath-
ing-houses on the left hand side of the harbor.
Concetta, with a sudden headlong rush, breath-
less and horrified had reached the landing pier.
With a loud cry she threw herself into the foam-
ing waves and disappeared.
At the same moment her father and brother
Salvatore, running after her, had reached the
water.

<#PG# 190>
Poor Niccolo, trembling in every limb, was at
first rendered almost helpless with horror; bnt
the despair which began to hold sway over him
gave him now superhuman strength. With fran-
tic haste he unfastened his little boat, and rowed
gesticulating wildly to the spot where he had seen
her sink. He loved his only daughter with a love
that was akin to idolatry. His grey hair fluttered
wildly about his furrowed and heated brow; great
tears trickled down his dark cheeks, and panting
aloud he gazed down into the foaming gloomy
depths.
"Santissima!" he cried aloud, "Madonna!
My greatest treasure—my only child! Have mer-
cy!"
A vivid flash of lightning illuminated the
stormy surface and then—he saw the red dress
floating upon the waves. "Cara mia!" he cried,
with a stammering tongue, wild with joy when he
had grasped her and dragged the dear form into
the boat. Calling her ceaselessly by endearing
names, he pressed her to his heart as though to
bring back warmth and life to her young body,
and covered her dear face with passionate kisses,

<#PG# 191>
but the beautiful head fell back pale and lifeless;
the great blue eyes were closed; she was dead.
With horror in his wide strained eyes, and pal-
lor on his quivering lips, he gazed at the prostrate
form before him, the lifeless eyes staring now
blankly at the sky,—the hue of life and exuberant
health still glowing on the full cheeks adorned with
every grace of youth and beauty.
"Morte—morte!" stammered the father, fran-
tic with grief, tearing his grey hair despairingly.
No merry glance, no roguish smile she had any
more for him.
"Figlia mia morte!" he cried, beating his
breast wildly. "You will be avenged, none of
them will escape!" And holding the dead Con-
cetta in his arms, he stood there erect with flaming
eyes and panting breath swearing the oath of
the deadly feud between him and the fam-
ily, clenching his fists threateningly. The mighty
grief tore at his heart strings and finally,
brought bitter tears to his burning eyes, great
drops streaming down over his grief-stricken
face.

<#PG# 192>
On the pier, Brother Salvatore had sunk upon
his knees and clasped the silver crucifix, which
hung at his side by a cord. Holding it out towards
the boat, he raised his voice, "Benedizione!" he
cried aloud. A shiver shook his emaciated frame
as if the spectacle which he beheld, would have
burned itself indelibly upon his memory.
The lightning flashes showed from afar the sil-
ver cross as it were—a symbol of atonement and
—forgiveness.

<#PG# 193>

<#PG# 194>
^

<#PG# 195>

<#PG# 196>

<#PG# 197>

<#PG# 198>
| ----------- ----- º ！！ ！！！



<#PG# 199>

