
<#PG# 0>

UC-NRLF.
$B 441 023
LOTTO

<#PG# 1>
PAULINE FORE MOFFITT
: LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
GENERAL LIBRARY, BERKELEY


<#PG# 2>

<#PG# 3>

<#PG# 4>
COLLECTION
or
BRITISH AUTHORS
TAUCHNITZ EDITION.
VOL. 1127.
SIR HARRY HOTSPUR OF HUMBLETHWAITE
BY
ANTHONY TROLLOPE.
IN ONE VOLUME.

<#PG# 5>
.
.
TAUCHNITZ EDITION.
By the same Author,
DOCTOR THORNE . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 vols.
THE BERTRAMS . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 vols,
THE WARDEN . . . . .
. . 1 vol.
BARCHESTER TOWERS . . . . . . . . . 2 vols.
CASTLE RICHMOND . . . . . . . . . . . 2 vols.
THE WEST INDIES AND THE SPANISH MAIN , 1 vol.
FRAMLEY PARSONAGE .......... 2 vols.
NORTH AMERICA ............ 3 vols.
ORLEY FARM . . . . . . . . .
3 vols.
RACHEL RAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 vols.
THE SMALL HOUSE AT ALLINGTON .
3 vols.
CAN YOU FORGIVE HER? . . . . . . . . 3 vols.
THE BELTON ESTATE. . . . . . . . . 2 vols.
THE LAST CHRONICLE OF BARSET .... 3 vols.
THE CLAVERINGS ............ 2 vols.
PHINEAS FINN . . . . . .
. . . . 3 vols.
3 vols.
HE KNEW HE WAS RIGHT , , , , ,
3 vols.
THE VICAR OF BULLHAMPTON . . . . . . 2 vols.
RALPH THE HEIR . . . . . . . . . . .
THE GOLDEN LION OF GRANPERE ..
1 vol.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND ....... 3 vols.
LADY ANNA .............. 2 vols.
HARRY HEATHCOTE OF GANGOIL ..... 1 vol.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW . . . . . . . . 2 vols.
2 vols.

<#PG# 6>
SIR HARRY HOTSPUR
HUMBLETHWAITE.
BY
ANTHONY TROLLOPE,
AUTHOR OF “FRAMLEY PARSONAGE,” ETC.
COPYRIGHT EDITION.
LEIPZIG
BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ
1871.
The Right of Translation is reserved.

<#PG# 7>
Add to Lib.
GIFT

<#PG# 8>
PR SO4 155
Si
tsy
1871
18
· CONTENTS.
Page
7
.
·
· ·
.
.
.
.
19
· ·
3
.
·
·
.
· ·
·
54
.
.
·
·
.
·
·
.
·
.
.
.
·
1об
·
·
.
119
·
CHAPTER I. Sir Harry Hotspur
- II. Our Heroine . . . .
III. Lord Alfred's Courtship . .
IV. Vacillation . . . . .
V. George Hotspur . . . .
VI. The Ball in Bruton Street . .
VII. Lady Altringham . . .
- VIII. Airey Force . . .
IX. “I know what you are” . .
X. Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber.
XI. Mrs. Morton . . . .
XII. The Hunt becomes hot
- XIII. I will not desert him . . .
- XIV. Pertinacity . . . . .
XV. Cousin George is hard pressed .
- XVI. Sir Harry's Return
- XVII. “Let us Try" . . . .
- XVIII. Good Advice . . . .
- XIX. The new Smithy . . .
- XX. Cousin George's Success . .
·
·
136
146
.
·
·
·
.
.
.
.
.
·
157
171
180
·
·
.
·
194
.
·
208
.
·
·
·
·
220
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
·
·
...
.
.
232
·
·
244
i
243

<#PG# 9>
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER XXI. Emily Hotspur's Sermon
--- XXII. George Hotspur yields .
XXIII. I shall never be Married
XXIV. The End . .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Page
256
271
236
.
.
.
.
301

<#PG# 10>
SIR HARRY HOTSPUR OF
HUMBLETHWAITE.
CHAPTER I.
Sir Harry Hotspur.
SIR HARRY HOTSPUR of Humblethwaite was a
mighty person in Cumberland, and one who well
understood of what nature were the duties, and of what
sort the magnificence, which his position as a great
English commoner required of him. He had twenty
thousand a year derived from land. His forefathers
had owned the same property in Cumberland for
nearly four centuries, and an estate nearly as large in
Durham for more than a century and a half. He had
married an earl's daughter, and had always lived
among men and women not only of high rank, but
also of high character. He had kept race-horses when
he was young, as noblemen and gentlemen then did
keep them, with no view to profit, calculating fairly
their cost as a part of his annual outlay, and thinking
that it was the proper thing to do for the improvement

<#PG# 11>
of horses and for the amusement of the people. He
had been in Parliament, but had made no figure there,
and had given it up. He still kept his house in Bruton
Street, and always spent a month or two in London.
But the life that he led was led at Humblethwaite, and
there he was a great man, with a great domain around
him,-with many tenants, with a world of dependants
among whom he spent his wealth freely, saving little,
but lavishing nothing that was not his own to lavish,
-understanding that his enjoyment was to come from
the comfort and respect of others, for whose welfare,
as he understood it, the good things of this world had
been bestowed upon him. He was a proud man, with
but few intimacies,— with a few dear friendships which
were the solace of his life,-altogether gracious in his
speech, if it were not for an apparent bashfulness
among strangers; never assuming aught, deferring
much to others outwardly, and showing his pride
chiefly by a certain impalpable noli me tangere, which
just sufficed to make itself felt and obeyed at the first
approach of any personal freedom. He was a hand-
some man,-—if an old man near to seventy may be
handsome, - with grey hair, and bright, keen eyes, and
arched eyebrows, with a well-cut eagle nose, and a
small mouth, and a short dimpled chin. He was under
the middle height, but nevertheless commanded atten-
tion by his appearance. He wore no beard save a
slight grey whisker, which was cut away before it

<#PG# 12>
reached his chin. He was strongly made, but not
stout, and was hale and active for his age.
Such was Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite.
The account of Lady Elizabeth, his wife, may be much
shorter. She was known,—where she was known,-
simply as Sir Harry's wife. He indeed was one of
those men of whom it may be said that everything
appertaining to them takes its importance from the
fact of its being theirs. Lady Elizabeth was a good
woman, a good wife, and a good mother, and was
twenty years younger than her husband. He had been
forty-five years old when he had married her, and she,
even yet, had not forgotten the deference which was
due to his age.
Two years before the time at which our story will
begin, a great sorrow, an absolutely crushing grief,
had fallen upon the House of Humblethwaite. An
only son had died just as he had reached his majority.
When the day came on which all Humblethwaite and
the surrounding villages were to have been told to
rejoice and make merry because another man of the
Hotspurs was ready to take the reins of the house as
soon as his father should have been gathered to his
fathers, the poor lad lay a-dying, while his mother
ministered by his bedside, and the Baronet was told
by the physician—who had been brought from London
—that there was no longer for him any hope that he

<#PG# 13>
10
should leave a male heir at Humblethwaite to inherit
his name and his honours.
For months it was thought that Lady Elizabeth
would follow her boy. Sir Harry bore the blow
bravely, though none who do not understand the
system well can conceive how the natural grief of the
father was increased by the disappointment which had
fallen upon the head of the house. But the old man
bore it well, making but few audible moans, shedding
no tears, altering in very little the habits of life; still
spending money, because it was good for others that
it should be spent, and only speaking of his son when
it was necessary for him to allude to those altered
arrangements as to the family property which it was
necessary that he should make. But still he was a
changed man, as those perceived who watched him
closest. Cloudesdale the butler knew well in what he
was changed, as did old Hesketh the groom, and
Gilsby the gamekeeper. He had never been given to
much talk, but was now more silent than of yore. Of
horses, dogs, and game there was no longer any men-
tion whatever made by the Baronet. He was still con-
stant with Mr. Lanesby, the steward, because it was
his duty to know everything that was done on the
property; but even Mr. Lanesby would acknowledge
that, as to actual improvements,—the commencement
of new work in the hope of future returns, the Baronet
was not at all the man he had been. How was it

<#PG# 14>
11
i
possible that he should be the man he had been when
his life was so nearly gone, and that other life had
gone also, which was to have been the renewal and
continuation of his own?
When the blow fell, it became Sir Harry's impera-
tive duty to make up his mind what he would do with
his property. As regarded the two estates, they were
now absolutely, every acre of them, at his own dis-
posal. He had one child left him, a daughter,-in
whom, it is hoped, the reader may be induced to take
some interest, and with her to feel some sympathy, for
she will be the person with whom the details of this
little story must most be concerned; and he had a
male heir, who must needs inherit the title of the
family, one George Hotspur,-not a nephew, for Sir
Harry had never had a brother, but the son of a first
cousin who had not himself been much esteemed at
Humblethwaite.
Now Sir Harry was a man who, in such a condition
as this in which he was now placed, would mainly be
guided by his ideas of duty. For a month or two he
said not a word to any one, not even to his own
lawyer, though he himself had made a will, a tem-
porary will, duly witnessed by Mr. Lanesby and an-
other, so that the ownership of the property should
not be adjusted simply by the chance direction of law
in the event of his own sudden demise; but his mind
was doubtless much burdened with the subject. How

<#PG# 15>
12
should he discharge this fresh responsibility which now
rested on him? While his boy had lived, the respon-
sibility of his property had had nothing for him but
charms. All was to go to the young Harry,—all, as
a matter of course; and it was only necessary for him
to take care that every acre should descend to his heir
not only unimpaired by him in value, but also some-
what increased. Provision for his widow and for his
girl had already been made before he had ventured on
matrimony,-- provision sufficient for many girls had
Fortune so far favoured him. But that an eldest son
should have all the family land, -one, though as many
sons should have been given to him as to Priam,-
and that that one should have it unencumbered, as he
had had it from his father,-this was to him the very
law of his being. And he would have taught that
son, had already begun to teach him when the great
blow came, that all this was to be given to him, not
that he might put it into his own belly, or wear it on
his own back, or even spend it as he might list him-
self, but that he might so live as to do his part in
maintaining that order of gentlehood in England, by
which England had become so thought Sir Harry,
the proudest and the greatest and the justest of
nations.
But now he had no son, and yet the duty remained
to 'him' of maintaining his order. It would perhaps
have been better for him, it would certainly have been

<#PG# 16>
13
easier, had some settlement or family entail fixed all
things for him. Those who knew him well personally,
but did not know the affairs of his family, declared
among themselves that Sir Harry would take care that
the property went with the title. A marriage might be
arranged. There could be nothing to object to a
marriage between second cousins. At any rate Sir
Harry Hotspur was certainly not the man to separate
the property from the title. But they who knew the
family, and especially that branch of the family from
which George Hotspur came, declared that Sir Harry
would never give his daughter to such a one as was
this cousin. And if not his daughter, then neither
would he give to such a scapegrace either Humblethwaite
in Cumberland or Scarrowby in Durham. There did
exist a party who said that Sir Harry would divide the
property, but they who held such an opinion certainly
knew very little of Sir Harry's social or political tenets.
Any such division was the one thing which he surely
would not effect.
When twelve months had passed after the death
of Sir Harry's son, George Hotspur had been at
Humblethwaite and had gone, and Sir Harry's will had
been made. He had left everything to his daughter,
and had only stipulated that her husband, should she
marry, should take the name of Hotspur. He had
decided, that should his daughter, as was probable,
marry within his lifetime, he could then make what

<#PG# 17>
settlements he pleased, even to the changing of the
tenor of his will, should he think fit to change it.
Should he die and leave her still a spinster, he would
trust to her in everything. Not being a man of
mystery, he told his wife and his daughter what he
had done,--and what he still thought that he possibly
might do; and being also a man to whom any sus-
picion of injustice was odious, he desired his attorney
to make known to George Hotspur what had been
settled. And in order that this blow to Cousin George
might be lightened,--Cousin George having in conver-
sation acknowledged to a few debts,-an immediate
present was made to him of four thousand pounds,
and double that amount was assured to him at the
Baronet's death.
The reader may be sure that the Baronet had heard
many things respecting Cousin George which he did
not like. To him personally it would have been in-
finitely preferable that the title and the estates should
have gone together, than that his own daughter should
be a great heiress. That her outlook into the world was
fair and full of promise of prosperity either way, was
clear enough. Twenty thousand a year would not be
necessary to make her a happy woman. And then it
was to him a manifest and a sacred religion that to
no man or to no woman were appointed the high
pinnacles of fortune simply that that man or that
woman might enjoy them. They were to be held as

<#PG# 18>
15
thrones are held, for the benefit of the many. And
in the disposition of this throne, the necessity of mak-
ing which had fallen upon him from the loss of his
own darling, he had brought himself to think—not of
his daughter's happiness, or to the balance of which,
in her possessing or not possessing the property, he
could venture on no prophecy, but of the welfare of
all those who might measure their weal or woe from
the manner in which the duties of this high place were
administered. He would fain that there should still
have been a Sir Harry or a Sir George Hotspur of
Humblethwaite; but he found that his duty required
him to make the other arrangement.
And yet he had liked the cousin, who indeed had
many gifts to win liking both from men and women.
Previously to the visit very little had been known per-
sonally of young George Hotspur at Humblethwaite.
His father, also a George, had in early life quarrelled
with the elder branch of the family, and had gone off
with what money belonged to him, and had lived and
died in Paris. The younger George had been educated
abroad, and then had purchased a commission in a
regiment of English cavalry. At the time when young
Harry died it was only known of him at Humble-
thwaite that he had achieved a certain reputation in
London, and that he had sold out of the army. He
was talked of as a man who shot birds with precision.
Pigeons he could shoot with wonderful dexterity,

<#PG# 19>
16
which art was at Humblethwaite supposed to be much
against him. But then he was equally successful with
partridges and pheasants; and partly on account of
such success, and partly probably because his manner
was pleasant, he was known to be a welcome guest at
houses in which men congregate to slaughter game.
In this way he had a reputation, and one that was not
altogether cause for reproach; but it had not pre-
| viously recommended him to the notice of his cousin.
Just ten months after poor Harry's death he was
asked, and went, to Humblethwaite. Probably at that
moment the Baronet's mind was still somewhat in
doubt. The wish of Lady Elizabeth had been clearly
expressed to her husband to the effect that encourage-
ment should be given to the young people to fall in
love with each other. To this Sir Harry never as-
sented; though there was a time,--and that time had
not yet passed when George Hotspur reached Humble-
thwaite,in which the Baronet was not altogether averse
to the idea of the marriage. But when George left
Humblethwaite the Baronet had made up his mind.
Tidings had reached him, and he was afraid of the
cousin. And other tidings had reached him also; or
rather perhaps it would be truer to him to say that
another idea had come to him. Of all the young
men now rising in England there was no young man
who more approved himself to Sir Harry's choice than
did Lord Alfred Gresley, the second son of his old

<#PG# 20>
17
friend and political leader the Marquis of Milnthorp.
Lord Alfred had but scanty fortune of his own, but
was in Parliament and in office, and was doing well.
All men said all good things of him. Then there was
a word or two spoken between the Marquis and the
Baronet, and just a word also with Lord Alfred him-
self. Lord Alfred had no objection to the name of
Hotspur. This was in October, while George Hotspur
was still declaring that Gilbsy knew nothing of getting
up a head of game; and then Lord Alfred promised
to come to Humblethwaite at Christmas. It was after
this that George owned to a few debts. His confes-
sion on that score did him no harm. Sir Harry had
made up his mind that day. Sir Harry had at that
time learned a good deal of his cousin George's mode
of life in London, and had already decided that this
young man was not one whom it would be well to set
upon the pinnacle.
And yet he had liked the young man, as did every-
body. Lady Elizabeth had liked him much, and for
a fortnight had gone on hoping that all difficulties
might have solved themselves by the young man's
marriage with her daughter. It need hardly be said
that not a word one way or the other was spoken to
Emily Hotspur; but it seemed to the mother that the
young people, though there was no love-making, yet
liked each other. Sir Harry at this time was up in
London for a month or two, hearing tidings, seeing
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 21>
18
Lord Alfred, who was at his office; and on his return,
that solution by family marriage was ordered to be for
ever banished from the maternal bosom. Sir Harry
said that it would not do.
Nevertheless, he was good to the young cousin,
and when the time was drawing nigh for the young
man's departure he spoke of a further visit. The
coverts at Humblethwaite, such as they were, would
always be at his service. This was a week before the
cousin went; but by the coming of the day on which
the cousin took his departure Sir Harry regretted that
he had made that offer of future hospitality.

<#PG# 22>
CHAPTER II.
Our Heroine.
give, wished that
“He has said nothing to her?" asked Sir Harry,
anxiously, of his wife.
“I think not,” replied Lady Elizabeth.
“Had he said anything that meant anything, she
would have told you?”.
“Certainly she would,” said Lady Elizabeth.
Sir Harry knew his child, and was satisfied that
no harm had been done; nevertheless, he wished that
that further invitation had not been given. If this
Christmas visitor that was to come to Humblethwaite
could be successful, all would be right; but it had
seemed to Sir Harry, during that last week of Cousin
George's sojourn beneath his roof, there had been
more of cousinly friendship between the cousins than
had been salutary, seeing, as he had seen, that any
closer connection was inexpedient. But he thought
that he was sure that no great harm had been done.
Had any word been spoken to his girl which she her-
self had taken as a declaration of love, she would cer-
tainly have told her mother. Sir Harry would no
more doubt his daughter than he would his own
honour. There were certain points and lines of duty

<#PG# 23>
20
clearly laid down for a girl so placed as was his
daughter; and Sir Harry, though he could not have
told whence the knowledge of these points and lines
had come to his child, never for a moment doubted
but that she knew them, and would obey them. To
know and to obey such points of duty were a part of
the inheritance of such an one as Emily Hotspur.
Nevertheless, it might be possible that her fancy
should be touched, and that she herself should know
nothing of it,—nothing that she could confide even to
a mother. Sir Harry understanding this, and having
seen in these last days something as he thought of too
close a cousinly friendship, was anxious that Lord
Alfred should come and settle everything. If Lord
Alfred should be successful, all danger would be at
an end, and the cousin might come again and do
what he liked with the coverts. Alas, alas! the cousin
should never have been allowed to show his hand-
some, wicked face at Humblethwaite! . .
Emily Hotspur was a girl whom any father would
have trusted; and let the reader understand this of
her, that she was one in whom intentional deceit was
impossible. Neither to her father nor to any one
could she lie either in word or action. And all these
lines and points of duty were well known to her,
though she knew not, and had never asked herself,
whence the lesson had come. Will it be too much to
say, that they had formed a part of her breeding, and

<#PG# 24>
21
had been given to her with her blood? She under-
stood well that from her, as heiress of the House of,
Humblethwaite, a double obedience was due to her
father,—the obedience of a child added to that which
was now required from her as the future transmitter of
honours of the house. And yet no word had been
said to her of the honours of the house; nor, indeed,
had many words ever been said as to that other
obedience. These lessons, when they have been well
learned, have ever come without direct teaching. -
But she knew more than this, and the knowledge
had reached her in the same manner. Though she
owed a great duty to her father, there was a limit to
that duty, of which, unconsciously, she was well aware.
When her mother told her that Lord Alfred was com-
ing, having been instructed to do so by Sir Harry;
and hinted, with a caress and a kiss, and a soft
whisper, that Lord Alfred was one of whom Sir Harry
approved greatly, and that if further approval could be
bestowed Sir Harry would not be displeased, Emily as
she returned her mother's embrace, felt that she had
a possession of her own with which neither father nor
mother might be allowed to interfere. It was for them,
or rather for him, to say that a hand so weighted as
was hers should not be given here or there; but it
was not for them, not even for him, to say that her
heart was to be given here, or to be given there. Let
them put upon her what weight they might of family
N
ES

<#PG# 25>
22
honours, and of family responsibility, that was her
own property;—if not, perhaps, to be bestowed at her
own pleasure, because of the pressure of that weight,
still her own, and absolutely beyond the bestowal of
any other.
Nevertheless, she declared to herself, and whispered
to her mother, that she would be glad to welcome
Lord Alfred. She had known him well when she was
a child of twelve years old and he was already a
young man in Parliament. Since those days she had
met him more than once in London. She was now
turned twenty, and he was something more than ten
years her senior; but there was nothing against him,
at any rate, on the score of age. Lord Alfred was
admitted on every side to be still a young man; and
though he had already been a lord of one Board or
of another for the last four years, and had earned a
reputation for working, he did not look like a man
who would be more addicted to sitting at Boards than
spending his time with young women. He was hand-
some, pleasant, good-humoured, and full of talk; had
nothing about him of the official fogy; and was re-
garded by all his friends as a man who was just now
fit to marry. “They say that he is such a good son,
and such a good brother," said Lady Elizabeth,
anxiously.
“Quite a Phoenix!” said Emily, laughing. Then
Lady Elizabeth began to fear that she had said too

<#PG# 26>
23
much, and did not mention Lord Alfred's name for
two days.
But Miss Hotspur had by that time resolved that
Lord Alfred should have a fair chance. If she could
teach herself to think that of all men walking the
earth Lord Alfred was the best and the most divine,
the nearest of all men to a god, how excellent a thing
would it be! Her great responsibility as to the family
burden would in that case already be acquitted with
credit. The wishes of her father, which on such a
subject were all but paramount, would be gratified;
and she herself would then be placed almost beyond
the hand of misfortune to hurt her. At any rate, the
great and almost crushing difficulty of her life would
so be solved. But the man must have enough in her
eyes of that godlike glory to satisfy her that she had
found in him one who would be almost a divinity, at
any rate to her. Could he speak as that other man
spoke? Could he look as that other one looked?
Would there be in his eye such a depth of colour, in
his voice such a sound of music, in his gait so divine
a grace? For that other one, though she had looked
into the brightness of the colour, though she had
heard the sweetness of the music, though she had
watched the elastic spring of the step, she cared
nothing as regarded her heart—her heart, which was
the one treasure of her own. No; she was sure of
that. Of her one own great treasure, she was much

<#PG# 27>
24
too chary to give it away unasked, and too indepen-
dent, as she told herself, to give it away unauthorized.
The field was open to Lord Alfred; and, as her father
wished it, Lord Alfred should be received with every
favour. If she could find divinity, then she would
bow before it readily.
Alas for Lord Alfred! We may all know that
when she thought of it thus, there was but poor
chance of success for Lord Alfred. Let him have
what of the godlike he might, she would find but
little of it there when she made her calculations and
resolutions after such fashion as this. The man who
becomes divine in a woman's eyes, has generally
achieved his claim to celestial honours by sudden
assault. And, alas! the qualities which carry him
through it and give the halo to his head may after
all be very ungodlike. Some such achievement had
already fallen in the way of Cousin George; though
had Cousin George and Lord Alfred been weighed in
just scales, the divinity of the latter, such as it was,
would have been found greatly to prevail. Indeed, it
might perhaps have been difficult to lay hold of and
bring forward as presentable for such office as that of
a lover for such a girl any young man who should be
less godlike than Cousin George. But he had gifts.
of simulation, which are valuable; and poor Emily
Hotspur had not yet learned the housewife's trick of
passing the web through her fingers, and of finding

<#PG# 28>
25
---------
---------
-
--
by the touch whether the fabric were of fine wool, or
of shoddy made up with craft to look like wool of the
finest.
- We say that there was but small chance for Lord
Alfred; nevertheless the lady was dutifully minded to
give him all the chance that it was in her power to
bestow. She did not tell herself that her father's
hopes were vain. Of her preference for that other
man she never told herself anything. She was not
aware that it existed. She knew that he was hand-
some; she thought that he was clever. She knew that
he had talked to her as no man had ever talked
before. She was aware that he was her nearest relative
beyond her father and mother, and that therefore she
might be allowed to love him as a cousin. She told
herself that he was a Hotspur, and that he must be
the head of the Hotspurs when her father should be
taken from them. She thought that he looked as a
man should look who would have to carry such a
dignity. But there was nothing more. No word had
been said to her on the subject; but she was aware,
because no word had been said, that it was not thought
fitting that she should be her cousin's bride. She
could not but know how great would be the advantage
could the estates and the title be kept together. Even
though he should inherit no acre of the land,-and
she had been told by her father that such was his
decision,--this Cousin George must become the head

<#PG# 29>
26
:
of the House of Hotspur; and to be head of the House
of Hotspur was to her a much greater thing than to
be the owner of Humblethwaite and Scarrowby. Gifts
like the latter might be given to a mere girl, like her-
self, were to be so given. But let any man living do
what he might, George Hotspur must become the head
and chief of the old House of Hotspur. Nevertheless,
it was not for her to join the two things together, un-
less her father should see that it would be good for
her to do so.
· Emily Hotspur was very like her father, having that
peculiar cast of countenance which had always char-
acterized the family. She had the same arch in her
eyebrows, indicating an aptitude for authority; the
same well-formed nose, though with her the beak of
the eagle was less prominent; the same short lip, and
small mouth, and delicate dimpled chin. With both
of them the lower part of the face was peculiarly short,
and finely cut. With both of them the brow was high
and broad, and the temples prominent. But the girl's
eyes were blue, while those of the old man were
brightly green. It was told of him that when a boy
his eyes also had been blue. Her hair, which was
very plentiful, was light in colour, but by no means
flaxen. Her complexion was as clear as the finest
porcelain; but there were ever roses in her cheeks, for
she was strong by nature, and her health was perfect.
She was somewhat short of stature, as were all the

<#PG# 30>
27
Hotspurs, and her feet and hands and ears were small
and delicate. But though short, she seemed to lack
nothing in symmetry, and certainly lacked nothing in
strength. She could ride or walk the whole day, and
had no feeling that such vigour of body was a posses-
sion of which a young lady should be ashamed. Such
as she was, she was the acknowledged beauty of the
county; and at Carlisle, where she showed herself at
least once a year at the county ball, there was neither
man nor woman, young nor old, who was not ready
to say that Emily Hotspur was, among maidens, the
glory of Cumberland.
Her life hitherto had been very quiet. There was
the ball at Carlisle, which she had attended thrice;
on the last occasion, because of her brother's death,
she had been absent, and the family of the Hotspurs
had been represented there only by the venison and
game which had been sent from Humblethwaite.
Twice also she had spent the months of May and June
in London; but it had not hitherto suited the tone of
her father's character to send his daughter out into all
the racket of a London season. She had gone to
balls, and to the opera, and had ridden in the Park,
and been seen at flower-shows; but she had not been
só common in those places as to be known to the
crowd. And, hitherto, neither in town or country,
had her name been connected with that of any suitor
for her hand. She was now twenty, and the reader

<#PG# 31>
28
will remember that in the twelve months last past, the
House of Humblethwaite had been clouded with deep
mourning.
The cousin was come and gone, and the Baronet
hoped in his heart that there might be an end of him
as far as Humblethwaite was concerned;-—at any rate
till his child should have given herself to a better
lover. Tidings had been sent to Sir Harry during the
last week of the young man's sojourn beneath his roof,
which of all that had reached his ears were the worst.
He had before heard of recklessness, of debt, of
dissipation, of bad comrades. Now he heard of worse
than these. If that which he now heard was true,
there had been dishonour. But Sir Harry was a man
who wanted ample evidence before he allowed his
judgment to actuate his conduct, and in this case the
evidence was far from ample. He did not stint his
hospitality to the future baronet, but he failed to repeat
that promise of a future welcome which had already
been given, and which had been thankfully accepted.
But a man knows that such an offer of renewed
hospitality should be repeated at the moment of
departure, and George Hotspur, as he was taken away
to the nearest station in his cousin's carriage, was quite
aware that Sir Harry did not then desire that the visit
should be repeated.
Lord Alfred was to be at Humblethwaite on Christ-
mas-eve. The emergencies of the Board at which he

<#PG# 32>
29
sat would not allow of an earlier absence from Lon-
don. He was a man who shirked no official duty,
and was afraid of no amount of work; and though he
knew how great was the prize before him, he refused
to leave his Board before the day had come at which
his Board must necessarily dispense with his services.
Between him and his father there had been no reticence,
and it was clearly understood by him that he was to
go down and win twenty thousand a year and the
prettiest girl in Cumberland, if his own capacity that
way, joined to all the favour of the girl's father and
mother, would enable him to attain success. To Emily
not a word more had been said on the subject than
those which have been already narrated as having been
spoken by the mother to the daughter. With all his
authority, with all his love for his only remaining child,
with all his consciousness of the terrible importance of
the matter at issue, Sir Harry could not bring himself
to suggest to his daughter that it would be well for
her to fall in love with the guest who was coming to
them. But to Lady Elizabeth he said very much. He
had quite made up his mind that the thing would be
good, and, having done so, he was very anxious that
the arrangement should be made. It was natural that
this girl of his should learn to love some youth; and,
how terrible was the danger of her loving amiss, when
so much depended on her loving wisely! The whole
X fate of the House of Hotspur was in her hands,-to

<#PG# 33>
30
do with it as she thought fit! Sir Harry trembled as
he reflected what would be the result were she to come
to him some day and ask his favour for a suitor wholly
unfitted to bear the name of Hotspur, and to sit on
the throne of Humblethwaite and Scarrowby.
“Is she pleased that he is coming?” he said to
his wife, the evening before the arrival of their
guest.
“Certainly she is pleased. She knows that we both
like him.”
“I remember when she used to talk about him-
often,” said Sir Harry.
“That was when she was a child.”
“But a year or two ago," said Sir Harry.
“Three or four years, perhaps; and with her that
is a long time. It is not likely that she should talk
much of him now. Of course she knows what it is
that we wish.”
“Does she think about her cousin at all?” he said
some hours afterwards.
“Yes, she thinks of him. That is only natural,
you know."
“It would be unnatural that she should think of
him much.”
“I do not see that,” said the mother, keen to
defend her daughter from what might seem to be an
implied reproach. “George Hotspur is a man who
will make himself thought of wherever he goes. He is

<#PG# 34>
31
clever, and very amusing ;--there is no denying that.
And then he has the Hotspur look all over.”
“I wish he had never set his foot within the
house," said the father.
“My dear, there is no such danger as you think,"
said Lady Elizabeth. “Emily is not a girl prone to
fall in love at a moment's notice because a man is
good-looking and amusing ;-and certainly not with
the conviction which she must have that her doing
so would greatly grieve you.” Sir Harry believed in
his daughter, and said no more; but he thoroughly
wished that Lord Alfred's wedding-day was fixed.
“Mamma,” said Emily, on the following day, “won't
Lord Alfred be very dull?”
“I hope not, my dear.”
“What is he to do, with nobody else here to amuse
him?"
“The Crutchleys are coming on the 27th.”
Now Mr. and Mrs. Crutchley were, as Emily thought,
very ordinary people, and quite unlikely to afford
amusement to Lord Alfred. Mr. Crutchley was an old
gentleman of county standing, and with property in
the county, living in a large dull red house in Penrith,
of whom Sir Harry thought a good deal, because he
was a gentleman who happened to have had great-
grandfathers and great-grandmothers. But he was quite
as old as Sir Harry, and Mrs. Crutchley was a great
deal older than Lady Elizabeth.

<#PG# 35>
32
“What will Lord Alfred have to say to Mrs. Crutchley,
mamma?”
“What do people in society always have to say to
each other? And the Lathebys are coming here to
dine to-morrow, and will come again, I don't doubt,
on the 27th.”
Mr. Latheby was the young Vicar of Humblethwaite,
and Mrs. Latheby was a very pretty young bride whom
he had just married.
“And then Lord Alfred shoots,” continued Lady
Elizabeth.
“Cousin George said that the shooting wasn't worth
going after,” said Emily, smiling. “Mamma, I fear
it will be a failure.” This made Lady Elizabeth un-
happy, as she thought that more was meant than was
really said. But she did not confide her fears to her
husband.

<#PG# 36>
33
CHAPTER III.
Lord Alfred's Courtship.
THE Hall, as the great house at Humblethwaite was
called, consisted in truth of various edifices added one
to another at various periods; but the result was this,
that no more picturesque mansion could be found in
any part of England than the Hall at Humblethwaite.
The oldest portion of it was said to be of the time of
Henry VII.; but it may perhaps be doubted whether
the set of rooms with lattice windows looking out on
to the bowling-green, each window from beneath its
own gable, was so old as the date assigned to it. It
is strange how little authority can usually be found in
family records to verify such statements. It was known
that Humblethwaite and the surrounding manors had
been given to, or in some fashion purchased by, a
certain Harry Hotspur, who also in his day had been
a knight, when Church lands were changing hands
under Henry VIII. And there was authority to prove
that that Sir Harry had done something towards
making a home for himself on the spot; but whether
those very gables were a portion of the building which
the monks of St. Humble had raised for themselves in
the preceding reign, may probably be doubted. That
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 37>
34
there were fragments of masonry, and parts of old
timber, remaining from the monastery was probably
true enough. The great body of the old house, as it
now stood, had been built in the time of Charles II.,
and there was the date in the brickwork still conspi-
cuous on the wall looking into the court. The hall
and front door as it now stood, very prominent but
quite at the end of the house, had been erected in
the reign of Queen Anne, and the modern drawing-
rooms with the best bedrooms over them, projecting
far out into the modern gardens, had been added by
the present baronet's father. The house was entirely
of brick, and the old windows,—not the very oldest,
the reader will understand, but those of the Caroline
age,--were built with strong stone mullions, and were
longer than they were deep, beauty of architecture
having in those days been more regarded than light.
Who does not know such windows, and has not
declared to himself often how sad a thing it is that
sanitary or scientific calculations should have banished
the like of them from our houses? Two large oriel
windows coming almost to the ground, and going up
almost to the ceilings, adorned the dining-room and
the library. From the drawing-rooms modern windows,
opening on to a terrace, led into the garden.
You entered the mansion by a court that was
enclosed on two sides altogether, and on the two
others partially. Facing you, as you drove in, was

<#PG# 38>
the body of the building, with the huge porch pro-
jecting on the right so as to give the appearance of
a portion of the house standing out on that side. On
the left was that old mythic Tudor remnant of the
monastery, of which the back wall seen from the court
was pierced only with a small window here and there,
and was covered with ivy. Those lattice windows,
from which Emily Hotspur loved to think that the
monks of old had looked into their trim gardens, now
looked on to a bowling-green which was kept very
trim in honour of the holy personages who were sup-
posed to have played there four centuries ago. Then,
at the end of this old building, there had been erected
kitchens, servants' offices, and various rooms, which
turned the corner of the court in front, so that only
one corner had, as it were, been left for ingress and
egress. But the court itself was large, and in the
middle of it there stood an old stone ornamental
structure, usually called the fountain, but quite ignorant
of water, loaded with griffins and satyrs and mermaids
with ample busts, all overgrown with a green damp
growth, which was scraped off by the joint efforts of
the gardener and mason once perhaps in every five
years.
It often seems that the beauty of architecture is
accidental. A great man goes to work with great
means on a great pile, and makes a great failure.
The world perceives that grace and beauty have
3*
7.7

<#PG# 39>
36
escaped him, and that even magnificence has been
hardly achieved. Then there grows up beneath various
unknown hands a complication of stones and brick to
the arrangement of which no great thought seems to
have been given; and, lo, there is a thing so perfect
in its glory that he who looks at it declares that
nothing could be taken away and nothing added
without injury and sacrilege and disgrace. So it had
been, or rather so it was now, with the Hall at
Humblethwaite. No rule ever made for the guidance
of an artist had been kept. The parts were out of
proportion. No two parts seemed to fit each other.
Put it all on paper, and it was an absurdity. The
huge hall and porch added on by the builder of Queen
Anne's time, at the very extremity of the house, were
almost a monstrosity. The passages and staircases,
and internal arrangements, were simply ridiculous.
But there was not a portion of the whole interior that
did not charm; nor was there a corner of the exterior,
nor a yard of an outside wall, that was not in itself
eminently beautiful.
Lord Alfred Gresley, as he was driven into the
court in the early dusk of a winter evening, having
passed through a mile and a half of such park scenery
as only Cumberland and Westmoreland can show, was
fully alive to the glories of the place. Humblethwaite
did not lie among the lakes,-was, indeed, full ten
miles to the north of Keswick; but it was so placed

<#PG# 40>
32
that it enjoyed the beauty and the luxury of mountains
and rivers, without the roughness of unmanageable
rocks, or the sterility and dampness of moorland. Of
rocky fragments, indeed, peeping out through the close
turf, and here and there coming forth boldly so as to
break the park into little depths, with now and again
a real ravine, there were plenty. And there ran right
across the park, passing so near the Hall as to require
a stone bridge in the very flower-garden, the Caldbeck,
as bright and swift a stream as ever took away the
water from neighbouring mountains. And to the south
of Humblethwaite there stood the huge Skiddaw, and
Saddleback with its long gaunt ridge; while to the
west, Brockleband Fell seemed to encircle the domain.
Lord Alfred, as he was driven up through the old
trees, and saw the deer peering at him from the knolls
and broken fragments of stone, felt that he need not
envy his elder brother if only his lines might fall to
him in this very pleasant place.
He had known Humblethwaite before; and, irre-
spective of all its beauties, and of the wealth of the
Hotspurs, was quite willing to fall in love with Emily
Hotspur. That a man with such dainties offered to
him should not become greedy, that there should be
no touch of avarice when such wealth was shown to
him, is almost more than we may dare to assert. But
Lord Alfred was a man not specially given to covet-
ousness. He had recognized it as his duty as a

<#PG# 41>
38
man not to seek for these things unless he could in
truth love the woman who held them in her hands to
give. But as he looked round him through the gloam-
ing of the evening, he thought that he remembered
that Emily Hotspur was all that was loveable.
! But, reader, we must not linger long over Lord
Alfred's love. A few words as to the father, a few as
to the daughter, and a few also as to the old house
where they dwelt together, it has been necessary to
say; but this little love story of Lord Alfred's,-if it
ever was a love story,- must be told very shortly.
He remained five weeks at Humblethwaite, and
showed himself willing to receive amusement from old
Mrs. Crutchley and from young Mrs. Latheby. The
shooting was quite good enough for him, and he won
golden opinions from every one about the place. He
made himself acquainted with the whole history of the
house, and was prepared to prove to demonstration
that Henry VII.'s monks had looked out of those very
windows, and had played at bowls on that very green.
Emily became fond of him after a fashion, but he
failed to assume any aspect of divinity in her eyes.
Of the thing to be done, neither father nor mother
said a word to the girl; and she, though she knew
so well that the doing of it was intended, said not
a word to her mother. Had Lady Elizabeth known
how to speak, had she dared to be free with her own

<#PG# 42>
39
child, Emily would soon have told her that there was
no chance for Lord Alfred. And Lady Elizabeth
would have believed her. Nay, Lady Elizabeth, though
she could not speak, had the woman's instinct, which
almost assured her that the match would never be
made. Sir Harry, on the other side, thought that
things went prosperously; and his wife did not dare to
undeceive him. He saw the young people together,
and thought that he saw that Emily was kind. He
did not know that this frank kindness was incompat-
ible with love in such a maiden's ways. As for Emily
herself, she knew that it must come. She knew that
she could not prevent it. A slight hint or two she
did give, or thought she gave, but they were too fine,
too impalpable to be of avail.
Lord Alfred spoke nothing of love till he, made
his offer in form. At last he was not hopeful himself.
He had found it impossible to speak to this girl of
love. She had been gracious with him, and almost
intimate, and yet it had been impossible. He thought
of himself that he was dull, stupid, lethargic, and
miserably undemonstrative. But the truth was that
there was nothing for him to demonstrate. He had
come there to do a stroke of business, and he could
not throw into this business a spark of that fire which
would have been kindled by such sympathy had it
existed. There are men who can raise such sparks,
the pretence of fire, where there is no heat at all;—.

<#PG# 43>
40
false, fraudulent men; but he was not such an one.
Nevertheless he went on with his business.
“Miss Hotspur," he said to her one morning be-
tween breakfast and lunch, when, as usual, opportunity
had been given him to be alone with her, “I have
something to say to you, which I hope at any rate it
will not make you angry to hear.”
“I am sure you will say nothing to make me
angry,” she replied. .
“I have already spoken to your father, and I have
his permission. I may say more. He assures me that
he hopes I may succeed.” He paused a moment, but
she remained quite tranquil. He watched her, and
could see that the delicate pink on her cheek was a
little heightened, and that a streak of colour showed
itself on her fair brow; but there was nothing in her
manner to give him either promise of success or as-
surance of failure. “You will know what I mean?”
“Yes, I know;" she said, almost in a whisper.
“And may I hope? To say that I love you dearly
seems to be saying what must be a matter of course.”
“I do not see that at all,” she replied with spirit.
“I do love you very dearly. If I may be allowed
to think that you will be my wife, I shall be the hap-
piest man in England. I know how great is the
honour which I seek, how immense in every way is
the gift which I ask you to give me. Can you love
me?"

<#PG# 44>
41
“No," she said, again dropping her voice to a
whisper.
“Is that all the answer, Miss Hotspur?”
“What should I say? How ought I to answer
you? If I could say it without seeming to be unkind,
indeed, indeed, I would do so.”
“Perhaps I have been abrupt.”
“It is not that. When you ask me--toto-
love you, of course I know what you mean. Should
I not speak the truth at once?”
“Must this be for always?”
“For-always,” she replied. And then it was over.
He did not himself press his suit further, though
he remained at Humblethwaite for three days after this
interview.
Before lunch on that day the story had been told
by Emily to her mother, and by Lord Alfred to Sir
Harry. Lady Elizabeth knew well enough that the
story would never have to be told in another way.
Sir Harry by no means so easily gave up his enter-
prise. He proposed to Lord Alfred that Emily should
be asked to reconsider her verdict. With his wife he
was very round, saying that an answer given so curtly
should go for nothing, and that the girl must be
taught her duty. With Emily herself he was less
urgent, less authoritative, and indeed at last somewhat
suppliant. He explained to her how excellent would
be the marriage; how it would settle this terrible re-
osed to Los casily gave chother way

<#PG# 45>
42
sponsibility which now lay on his shoulders with so
heavy a weight; how glorious would be her position;
and how the Hotspurs would still live as a great
family could she bring herself to be obedient. And
he said very much in praise of Lord Alfred, pointing
out how good a man he was, how moral, how diligent,
how safe, how clever,-how sure, with the assistance
of the means which she would give him, to be one of
the notable men of the country. But she never yielded
an inch. She said very little,-answered him hardly
a word, standing close to him, holding by his arm
and his hand. There was the fact, that she would
not have the man, would not have the man now or
ever, certainly would not have him; and Sir Harry,
let him struggle as he might, and talk his best, could
not keep himself from giving absolute credit to her
assurance.
The visit was prolonged for three days, and then
Lord Alfred left Humblethwaite Hall, with less ap-
preciation of all its beauties than he had felt as he
was first being driven up to the Hall doors. When
he went, Sir Harry could only bid God bless him, and
assure him that, should he ever choose to try his for-
tune again, he should have all the aid which a father
could give him.
"It would be useless," said Lord Alfred; “she
knows her own mind too well.”
And so he went his way.

<#PG# 46>
43
CHAPTER IV.
Vacillation.
WHEN the spring-time came, Sir Harry Hotspur,
with his wife and daughter, went up to London.
During the last season the house in Bruton Street
had been empty. He and his wife were then mourn-
ing their lost son, and there was no place for the
gaiety of London in their lives. Sir Harry was still
thinking of his great loss. He was always thinking
of the boy who was gone, who had been the apple of
his eye, his one great treasure, the only human being
in the world whose superior importance to his own he
had been ready, in his heart of hearts, to admit; but
it was needful that the outer signs of sorrow should
be laid aside, and Emily Hotspur was taken up to
London, in order that she might be suited with a
husband. That, in truth, was the reason of their
going. Neither Sir Harry nor Lady Elizabeth would
have cared to leave Cumberland had there been no
such cause. They would have been altogether content
to remain at home had Emily been obedient enough
in the winter to accept the hand of the suitor proposed
for her.
The house was opened in Bruton Street, and Lord

<#PG# 47>
44
Alfred came to see them. So also did Cousin George.
There was no reason why Cousin George should not
come. Indeed, had he not done so, he must have
been the most ungracious of cousins. He came, and
found Lady Elizabeth and Emily at home. Emily
told him that they were always there to receive visi-
tors on Sundays after morning church, and then he
came again. She had made no such communication
to Lord Alfred, but then perhaps it would have been
hardly natural that she should have done so. Lady
Elizabeth, in a note which she had occasion to write
to Lord Alfred, did tell him of her custom on a
Sunday afternoon; but Lord Alfred took no such
immediate advantage of the offer as did Cousin
George.
As regarded the outward appearance of their life,
the Hotspurs were gayer this May than they had
been heretofore when living in London. There were
dinner-parties, whereas in previous times there had
only been dinners at which a few friends might join
them;—and there was to be a ball. There was a box
at the Opera, and there were horses for the Park, and
there was an understanding that the dealings with
Madame Milvodi, the milliner, were to be as unlimited
as the occasion demanded. It was perceived by
every one that Miss Hotspur was to be settled in life.
Not a few knew the story of Lord Alfred. Every
one knew the facts of the property and Emily's posi-

<#PG# 48>
45
tion as heiress, though every one probably did not
know that it was still in Sir Harry's power to leave
every acre of the property to whom he pleased. Emily
understood it all herself. There lay upon her that
terrible responsibility of doing her best with the
Hotspur interests. To her the death of her brother
had at the time been the blackest of misfortunes, and
it was not the less so now as she thought of her own
position. She had been steady enough as to the
refusal of Lord Alfred, knowing well enough that she
cared nothing for him. But there had since come
upon her moments almost of regret that she should
have been unable to accept him. It would have been
so easy a way of escape from all her troubles without
the assistance of Madame Milvodi, and the opera-box,
and the Park horses! At the time she had her own
ideas about another man, but her ideas were not
such as to make her think that any further work with
Madame Milvodi and the opera-box would be un-'.
necessary.
Then came the question of asking Cousin George
to the house. He had already been told to come on
Sundays, and on the very next Sunday had been
there. He had given no cause of offence at Humble-
thwaite, and Lady Elizabeth was of opinion that he
should be asked to dinner. If he were not asked, the
very omission would show that they were afraid of
him. Lady Elizabeth did not exactly explain this

<#PG# 49>
46
to her husband, did not accurately know that such
was her fear; but Sir Harry understood her feelings,
and yielded. Let Cousin George be asked to dinner.
Sir Harry at this time was vacillating with more of
weakness than would have been expected from a man
who had generally been so firm in the affairs of his
life. He had been quite clear about George Hotspur,
when those inquiries of his were first made, and when
his mind had first accepted the notion of Lord Alfred
as his chosen son-in-law. But now he was again at
sea. He was so conscious of the importance of his
daughter's case, that he could not bring himself to be
at ease, and to allow himself to expect that the girl
would, in the ordinary course of nature, dispose of her
young heart not to her own injury, as might reason-
ably be hoped from her temperament, her character,
and her education. He could not protect himself
from daily and hourly thought about it. Her mar-
riage was not as the marriage of other girls. The
house of Hotspur, which had lived and prospered for
so many centuries, was to live and prosper through her;
or rather mainly through the man whom she should
choose as her husband. The girl was all-important
now, but when she should have once disposed of her-
self her importance would be almost at an end. Sir
Harry had in the recess of his mind almost a convic-
tion that, although the thing was of such utmost
moment, it would be better for him, better for them

<#PG# 50>
47
all, better for the Hotspurs, that the matter should
be allowed to arrange itself than that there should be
any special judgment used in selection. He almost
believed that his girl should be left to herself, as are
other girls. But the thing was of such moment that
he could not save himself from having it always before
his eyes.
And yet he knew not what to do; nor was there
any aid forthcoming from Lady Elizabeth. He had
tried his hand at the choice of a proper husband, and
his daughter would have none of the man so chosen.
So he had brought her up to London, and thrown her
as it were upon the market. Let Madame Milvodi
and the opera-box and the Park horses do what they
could for her. Of course a watch should be kept on
her;—not from doubt of her excellence, but because
the thing to be disposed of was so all-important, and
the girl's mode of disposing of it might, without dis-
grace or fault on her part, be so vitally prejudicial to
the family!
For, let it be remembered, no curled darling of an
eldest son would suit the exigencies of the case, un-
less such eldest son were willing altogether to merge
the claims of his own family, and to make himself
by name and purpose a Hotspur. Were his child
to present to him as his son-in-law some heir to a
noble house, some future earl, say even a duke in
embryo, all that would be as nothing to Sir Harry.

<#PG# 51>
48
It was not his ambition to see his daughter a duchess.
He wanted no name, or place, or dominion for any
Hotspur greater or higher or more noble than those
which the Hotspurs claimed and could maintain for
themselves. To have Humblethwaite and Scarrowby
lost amidst the vast appanages and domains of some
titled family, whose gorgeous glories were new and
paltry in comparison with the mellow honours of his
own house, would to him have been a ruin to all his
hopes. There might, indeed, be some arrangement as
to the second son proceeding from such a marriage,
as to a future chance Hotspur; but the claims of the
Hotspurs were, he thought, too high and too holy for
such future chance; and in such case, for one genera-
tion at least, the Hotspurs would be in abeyance.
No: it was not that which he desired. That would
not suffice for him. The son-in-law that he desired
should be well born, a perfect gentleman, with belong-
ings of whom he and his child might be proud; but
he should be one who should be content to rest his
claims to material prosperity and personal position on
the name and wealth that he would obtain with his
wife. Lord Alfred had been the very man; but then
his girl would have none of Lord Alfred! Eldest
sons there might be in plenty ready to take such a
bride; and were some eldest son to come to him and
ask for his daughter's hand, some eldest son who
would do so almost with a right to claim it if the

<#PG# 52>
49
girl's consent were gained, how could he refuse? And
yet to leave a Hotspur behind him living at Humble-
thwaite, and Hotspurs who should follow that Hotspur,
was all in all to him. .
Might he venture to think once again of Cousin
George? Cousin George was there, coming to the
house, and his wife was telling him that it was in-
cumbent on them to ask the young man to dinner.
It was incumbent on them, unless they meant to let
him know that he was to be regarded absolutely
as a stranger,—as one whom they had taken up for
a while, and now chose to drop again. A very ugly
story had reached Sir Harry's ears about Cousin
George. It was said that he had twice borrowed
money from the money-lenders on his commission,
· passing some document for security of its value
which was no security, and that he had barely escaped
detection, the two Jews knowing that the commission
would be forfeited altogether if the fraud were brought
to light. The commission had been sold, and the
proceeds divided between the Jews, with certain re-
maining claims to them on Cousin George's personal
estate. Such had been the story which in a vague
way had reached Sir Harry's ears. It is not easily
that such a man as Sir Harry can learn the details
of a disreputable cousin's life. Among all his old
friends he had none more dear to him than Lord
Milnthorp; and among his younger friends none more
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 53>
50
intimate than Lord Burton, the eldest son of Lord
Milnthorp, Lord Alfred's brother. Lord Burton had
told him the story, telling him at the same time that
he could not vouch for its truth. “Upon my word,
I don't know," said Lord Burton, when interrogated
again. "I think if I were you I would regard it as
though I had never heard it. Of course, he was in
debt."
“That is altogether another thing,” said Sir Harry.
“Altogether! I think that probably he did pawn
his commission. That is bad, but it isn't so very bad.
As for the other charge against him, I doubt it." So
said Lord Burton, and Sir Harry determined that the
accusation should go for nothing. .
: But his own child, his only child, the transmitter of
all the great things that fortune had given to him;
she, in whose hands were to tie the glories of Humble-
thwaite and Scarrowby; she, who had the giving away
of the honour of their ancient family,--could she be
trusted to one of whom it must be adinitted that all
his early life had been disreputable, even if the world's
lenient judgment in such matters should fail to stig-
matize it as dishonourable? In other respects, how-
ever, he was so manifestly the man to whom his
daughter ought to be given in marriage! By such
arrangement would the title and the property be kept
together,--and by no other which Sir Harry could
now make, for his word had been given to his daughter

<#PG# 54>
51
that she was to be his heiress. Let him make what
arrangements he might, this Cousin George, at his
death, would be the head of the family. Every
"Peerage” that was printed would tell the old story
to all the world. By certain courtesies of the law of
descent his future héirs would be Hotspurs were his
daughter married to Lord Alfred or the like; but the
children of such a marriage would not be Hotspurs in
very truth, nor by any courtesy of law, or even by
any kindness of the Minister or Sovereign, could the
child of such a unión become the baronet, the Sir
Harry of the day, the head of the family. The posi-
tion was one which no Sovereign and no Minister
could achieve, or touch, or bestow. It was his, beyond
the power of any earthly potentate to deprive him of
it, and would have been transmitted by him to a son
with as absolute security. But--alas! alas
Sir Harry gave no indication that he thought it
expedient to change his mind on the subject. When
Lady Elizabeth proposed that Cousin George should
be asked to dinner, he frowned and looked black as
he acceded; but, in truth, he vacillated. The allure-
ments on that side were so great that he could not
altogether force upon himself the duty of throwing
them from him. He knew that Cousin George was
no fitting husband for his girl, that he was a man to
whom he would not have thought of giving her, had
her happiness been his only object. And he did not
!

<#PG# 55>
52
think of so. bestowing her now. He became uneasy
when he remembered the danger. He was unhappy
as he remembered how amusing, how handsome, how
attractive was Cousin George. He feared that Emily
might like him!--by no means hoped it. And yet he
vacillated, and allowed Cousin George to come to the
house, only because Cousin George must become, on
his death, the head of the Hotspurs. .
Cousin George came on one Sunday, came on
another Sunday, dined at the house, and was of course
asked to the ball. But Lady Elizabeth had so ar-
ranged her little affairs that when Cousin George left
Bruton Street on the evening of the dinner party he
and Emily had never been for two minutes alone to-
gether since the family had come up to London.
Lady Elizabeth herself liked Cousin George, and, had
an edict to. that effect been pronounced by her hus-
band, would have left them alone together with great
maternal satisfaction. But she had been told that it
was not to be so, and therefore the young people had
never been allowed to have opportunities. Lady
Elizabeth in her very quiet way knew how to do the
work of the world that was allotted to her. There
had been other balls, and there had been ridings in
the Park, and all the chances of life which young men,
and sometimes young women also, know so well how
to use; but hitherto Cousin George had kept, or had
been constrained to keep, his distance, lis

<#PG# 56>
53
“I want to know, Mamma,” said Emily Hotspur,
the day before the ball, “whether Cousin George is a
black sheep or a white sheep?"
“What do you mean, my dear, by asking such a
question as that?"
“I don't like black sheep. I don't see why young
men are to be allowed to be black sheep; but yet you
know they are.” :
“How can it be helped?”
“People should not notice them, Mamma.”
“My dear, it is a most difficult question, - quite
beyond me, and I am sure beyond you. A sheep
needn't be black always because he has not always
been quite white; and then you know the black lambs
are just as dear to their mother as the white.” .
“Dearer, I think.”
"I quite agree with you, Emily, that in general
society black sheep should be avoided.”
“Then they shouldn't be allowed to come in," said
Emily. Lady Elizabeth knew from this that there
was danger, but the danger was not of a kind which
enabled her specially to consult Sir Harry.
-

<#PG# 57>
CHAPTER V.
'
George Hotspur.
A LITTLE must now be told to the reader of Cousin
George and the ways of his life. As Lady Elizabeth
had said to her daughter, thạt question of admitting
black sheep into society, or of refusing them admit-
tance, is very difficult. In the first place, whose eyes
are good enough to know whether in truth a sheep be
black or not? And then is it not the fact that some
little amount of shade in the fleece of male sheep is
considered, if not absolutely desirable, at any rate
quite pardonable? A male sheep with a fleece as
white as that of a ewe-lamb,-is he not considered to
be, among muttons, somewhat insipid? It was of this
taste of which Pope was conscious when he declared
that every woman was at heart a rake. And so it
comes to pass that very black sheep indeed are ad-
mitted into society, till at last anxious fathers and more
anxious mothers begin to be aware that their young
ones are turned out to graze among ravenous wolves.
This, however, must be admitted, that lambs when so
treated acquire a courage which tends to enable them
to hold their own, even amidst wolfish dangers.
Cousin George, if not a ravenous wolf, was at any

<#PG# 58>
a
55
rate a very black sheep indeed. In our anxiety to
know the truth of him it must not be said that he was
absolutely a wolf,-- not as yet,-because in his career
he had not as yet made premeditated attempts to
devour prey. But in the process of delivering himself
up to be devoured by others, he had done things
which if known of any sheep should prevent that
sheep from being received into a decent flock. There
had been that little trouble about his commission, in
which, although he had not intended to cheat either
Jew, he had done that which the world would have
called cheating had the world known it. As for
getting goods from tradesmen without any hope or
thought of paying for them, that with him was so
much a thing of custom ,--as indeed it was also with
them,--that he was almost to be excused for con-
sidering it the normal condition of life for a man in
his position. To gamble and lose money had come
to him quite naturally at a very early age. There had
now come upon him an idea that he might turn the
tables, that in all gambling transactions some one must
win, and that as he had lost much, so possibly might
he now win more. He had not quite yet reached that
point in his education at which the gambler learns
that the ready way to win much is to win unfairly;-
not quite yet, but he was near it. The wolf hood was
coming on him, unless some good fortune might save
him. There might, however, be such good fortune in

<#PG# 59>
56
store for him. As Lady Elizabeth had said, a sheep
that was very dark in colour might become white again.
If it be not so, what is all this doctrine of repentance
in which we believe?
; Blackness in a male sheep in regard to the other
sin is venial blackness. Whether the teller of such a
tale as this should say so outright, may be matter of
dispute; but, unless he say so, the teller of this tale
does not know how to tell his tale truly. Blackness
such as that will be all .condoned, and the sheep
received into almost any flock, on condition, not of
repentance or humiliation or confession, but simply of
change of practice. The change of practice in certain
circumstances and at a certain period becomes ex-
pedient; and if it be made, as regards tints in the
wool of that nature, the sheep becomes as white as he
is needed to be. In this respect our sheep had been
as black as any sheep, and at this present period of
his life had need of much change before he would be
fit for any decent social herding.
. And then there are the shades of black which come
from conviviality,—which we may call table blackness,
-as to which there is an opinion constantly dis-
seminated by the moral newspapers of the day, that -
there has come to be altogether an end of any such
blackness among sheep who are gentlemen. To make
up for this, indeed, there has been expressed by the
piquant newspapers of the day an opinion that ladies

<#PG# 60>
57
are taking up the game which gentlemen no longer
care to play. It may be doubted whether either ex-
pression has in it much of truth. We do not see ladies
drunk, certainly, and we do not see gentlemen tumbling
about as they used to do, because their fashion of
drinking is not that of their grandfathers. But the
love of wine has not gone out from among men; and
men now are as prone as ever to indulge their loves.
Our black sheep was very fond of wine,—and also of
brandy, though he was wolf enough to hide his taste
when occasion required it.
Very early in life he had come from France to live
in England, and had been placed in a cavalry regi-
ment, which had, unfortunately for him, been quartered
either in London or its vicinity. And, perhaps equally
unfortunate for him, he had in his own possession a
small fortune of some 500l. a year. This had not
come to him from his father; and when his father had
died in Paris, about two years before the date of our
story, he had received no accession of regular income.
Some couple of thousand of pounds had reached his
hands from his father's effects, which had helped him
through some of the immediately pressing difficulties
of the day,—for his own income at that time had
been altogether dissipated. And now he had received
a much larger sum from his cousin, with an assurance,
however, that the family property would not become
his when he succeeded to the family title. He was so

<#PG# 61>
58
penniless at the time, so prone to live from hand to
mouth, so little given to consideration of the future,
that it may be doubted whether the sum given to him
was not compensation in full for all that was to be
withheld from him.
Still there was his chance with the heiress! In
regarding this chance, he had very soon determined
that he would marry his cousin if it might be within
his power to do so. He knew, and fully appreciated,
his own advantages. He was a handsome man,-tall
for a Hotspur, but with the Hotspur fair hair and blue
eyes, and well-cut features. There lacked, however,
to him, that peculiar aspect of firmness about the
temples which so strongly marked the countenance of
Sir Harry and his daughter; and there had come upon
him a blasé look, and certain outer signs of a bad
life, which, however, did not mar his beauty, nor were
they always apparent. The eye was not always
bloodshot, nor was the hand constantly seen to shake.
It may be said of him, both as to his moral and
physical position, that he was on the edge of the
precipice of degradation, but that there was yet a
possibility of salvation.
He was living in a bachelor's set of rooms, at this
time, in St. James's Street, for which, it must be pre-
sumed, that ready money was required. During the
last winter he had horses in Northamptonshire, for the
hire of which, it must be feared, that his prospects

<#PG# 62>
59:
as heir to Humblethwaite had in some degree been
pawned. At the present time he had a horse for Park
riding, and he looked upon a good dinner, with good
wine, as being due to him every day, as thoroughly
as though he earned it. That he had never attempted
to earn a shilling since the day on which he had
ceased to be a soldier, pow four years since, the
reader will hardly require to be informed,
In spite of all his faults, this man enjoyed a cer-
tain social popularity for which mạny a rich man would
have given a third of his income. Dukes and duchesses
were fond of him; and certain persons, standing very
high in the world, did not think certain parties were
perfect without him, ' He knew how to talk enough,
and yet not to talk too much. No one could say of
him that he was, witty, well-read, or given to much
thinking; but he knew just, what was wanted at this
point of time or at that, and could give it. He could
put himself forward, and could keep himself in the
background. He could shoot well without wanting to
shoot best. He could fetch and carry, but still do it
always with an air of manly independence. He could
subserve without an air of cringing. And then he
looked like a gentleman.
Of all his well-to-do friends, perhaps he who really
liked him best was the Earl of Altringham. George
Hotspur was at this time something under thirty years
of age, and the Earl was four years his senior. The

<#PG# 63>
60
Earl was a married man, with a family, a wife who
also liked poor George, an enormous income, and a
place in Scotland at which George always spent the
three first weeks of grouse-shooting. The Earl was a
kindly, good-humoured, liberal, but yet hard man of
the world. He knew George Hotspur well, and would
on no account lend him a shilling. He would not
have given his friend money to extricate him from any
difficulty. But he forgave the sinner all his sins, opened
Castle Corry to him every year, provided him with the
best of everything, and let him come and dine at Al-
tringham House, in Carlton Gardens, as often almost
as he chose during the London season. The Earl was
very good to George, though he knew more about him
than perhaps did any other man; but he would not bet
with George, nor would he in any way allow George
to make money out of him.
“Do you suppose that I want to win money of
you?” he once said to our friend, in answer to a little
proposition that was made to him at Newmarket. “I
don't suppose you do,” George had answered. “Then
you may be sure that I don't want to lose any,” the
Earl had replied. And so the matter was ended, and
George made no more propositions of the kind.
The two men were together at Tattersall's, looking
at some horses which the Earl had sent up to be sold
the day after the dinner in Bruton Street. “Sir Harry

<#PG# 64>
611
seems to be taking to you very kindly," said the
Earl.
“Well,-yes; in a half-and-half sort of way."
“It isn't everybody that would give you £5,000,
you know." ..
"I am not everybody's heir," said George. :
“No; and you ain't his, - worse luck.”
"I am,-in regard to the title.”
“What good will that do you?”
“When he's gone, I shall be the head of the
family. As far as I can understand these matters, he
hasn't a right to leave the estates away from me.”
. “Power is right, my boy. Legal power is un-
doubtedly right.”
.., "He should at any rate divide them. There are
two distinct properties, and either of them would make
me a rich man. I don't feel so very much obliged
to him for his money, - though of course it was con-
venient.”
“Very convenient, I should say, George. How do
you get on with your cousin?”
“They watch me like a cat watches a mouse.”
“Say a rat, rather, George. Don't you know they
are right? Would not I do the same if she were my
girl, knowing you as I do?”
“She might do worse, my Lord.”
“I'll tell you what it is. He thinks that he might
do worse. I don't doubt about that. All this matter

<#PG# 65>
62
of the family and the title, and the name, would make
him ready to fling her to you,- if only you were a
shade less dark a horse than you are.”
"I don't know that I'm darker than others.”
“Look here, old fellow; I don't often trouble you
with advice, but I will now. If you'll set yourself
steadily to work to live decently, if you'll tell Sir Harry
the whole truth about your money matters, and really
get into harness, I believe you may have her. Such a
one as you never had such a chance before. But
there's one thing you must do."
“What is the one thing?”
“Wash your hands altogether of Mrs. Morton.
You'll have a difficulty, I know, and perhaps it will
want more pluck than you've got. You haven't got
pluck of that kind."
“You mean that I don't like to break a woman's
Heart?"
“Fiddlestick! Do you see that mare, there?”
“I was just looking at her. Why should you part
with her?”
“She was the best animal in my stables, but she's
given to eating the stable-boys; old Badger told me
fat, that he wouldn't have her in the stables any
longer. I pity the fellow who will buy her,--or rather
his fellow. She killed a lad once in Brookborough's
stables."
“Why don't you shoot her?”

<#PG# 66>
63
“I can't afford to shoot horses, Captain Hotspur.
I had my chance in buying het, and somebody else
must have his chance now. That's the lot of them;
one or two good ones, and the rest what I call rags.
Do you think of what I've said; and be sure of this:
Mrs. Morton and your cousin can't go on together.
Ta, Ta!-- I'm going across to my mother's.”
George Hotspur, when he was left alone, did think
a great deal about it. He was not a man prone to
assure himself of a lady's favour without cause; and
yet he did think that his cousin liked him. As to
that terrible difficulty to which Lord Altringham had
alluded, he knew that something must be done; but
there were cruel embarrassments on that side of which
even Altringham knew nothing. And then why should
he do that which his friend had indicated to him, be-
fore he knew whether it would be necessary? As to
taking Sir Harry altogether into his confidence about
his money matters, that was clearly impossible. Heaven
and earth! How could the one man speak such truths,
or the other man listen to them? When money diffi-
culties come of such nature as those which weighted
the shoulders of poor George Hotspur, it is quite im-
possible that there should be any such confidence with
any one. The sufferer cannot even make a confidant
of himself, cannot even bring himself to look at his
own troubles massed together. It was not the amount
of his debts, but the nature of them, and the charac,

<#PG# 67>
64
ters of the men with whom he had dealings, that were
so terrible. Fifteen thousand pounds -- less than one
year's income from Sir Harry's property — would clear
him of everything, as far as he could judge; but there
could be no such clearing, otherwise than by money
disbursed by himself, without a disclosure of dirt which
he certainly would not dare to make to Sir Harry be-
fore his marriage.
But yet the prize to be won was so great, and
there were so many reasons for thinking that it might
possibly be within his grasp! If, after all, he might
live to be Sir George Hotspur of Humblethwaite and
Scarrowby! After thinking of it as well as he could,
he determined that he would make the attempt; but
as to those preliminaries to which Lord Altringham
had referred, he would for the present leave them to
chance.
Lord Altringham had been quite right when he told
George Hotspur that he was deficient in a certain kind
of pluck.

<#PG# 68>
CHAPTER VI.
The Ball in Bruton Street.
SIR HARRY vacillated, Lady Elizabeth doubted, and
Cousin George was allowed to come to the ball. At
this time, in the common understanding of such
phrase, Emily Hotspur was heart-whole in regard to
her cousin. Had she been made to know that he
had gone away for ever,- been banished to some
antipodes from which he never could return,—there
would have been no lasting sorrow on her part,
though there might have been some feeling which
would have given her an ache for the moment. She
had thought about him, as girls will think of men as
to whom they own to themselves that it is possible
that they may be in love with them some day;—and
she liked him much. She also liked Lord Alfred, but
the liking had been altogether of a different kind. In
regard to Lord Alfred she had been quite sure, from
the first days of her intercourse with him, that she
could never be in love with him. He was to her no
more than old Mr. Crutchley or young Mr. Latheby,
-a man, and a good sort of man, but no more than
a man. To worship Lord Alfred must be impossible
to her. She had already conceived that it would be
Sir Harry Hotspur,

<#PG# 69>
66
quite possible for her to worship her Cousin George
in the teeth of all the hard things that she had heard
of him. The reader may be sure that such a thought
had passed through her riind when she asked her
mother whether Cousin George was to be accepted as
a black sheep or a white one?
The ball was a very grand affair, and Emily
Hotspur was a very great lady. It had come to be
understood that the successful suitor for her hand
would be the future lord of Humblethwaite, and the
power with which she was thus vested gave her a
prestige and standing which can hardly be attained
by mere wit and beauty, even when most perfectly
combined. It was not that all who worshipped, either
at a distance or with passing homage, knew the fact.
of the heiress-ship, or had ever heard of the £20,000
a year; but, given the status, and the worshippers will
come. The word had gone forth in some mysterious
way, and it was acknowledged that Emily Hotspur
was a great young lady. Other young ladies, who
were not great, allowed themselves to be postponed
to her almost without jealousy, and young gentlemen
without pretensions regarded her as one to whom
they did not dare to ask to be introduced. Emily
saw it all, and partly liked it, and partly despised it.
But, even when despising it, she took advantage of it.
The young gentlemen without pretensions were no
more to her than the chairs and tables; and the

<#PG# 70>
67
young ladies who submitted to her and adored her,-
were allowed to be submissive, and to adore. But of
this she was quite sure,—that her Cousin George must
some day be the head of her own family. He was a
man whom she was bound to treat with attentive
regard, if they who had the custody of her chose to
place her in his company at all.
At this ball there were some very distinguished
people indeed, -persons whom it would hardly be
improper to call illustrious. There were two royal
duchesses, one of whom was English, and no less
than three princes. The Russian and French ambas-
sadors were both there. There was the editor of the
most influential newspaper of the day,—for a few
minutes only; and the Prime Minister passed through
the room in the course of the evening. Dukes and
duchesses below the royal degree were common; and
as for earls and countesses, and their daughters, they
formed the ruck of the crowd. The Poet-laureate
didn't come indeed, but was expected; and three
Chinese mandarins of the first quality entered the
room at eleven, and did not leave till one. Poor
Lady Elizabeth suffered a great deal with those man-
darins. From all this it will be seen that the ball was
quite a success.
George Hotspur dined that day with Lord and
Lady Altringham, and went with them to the ball in
the evening. Lord Altringham, though his manner
5*

<#PG# 71>
68
was airy and almost indifferent, was in truth most
anxious that his friend should be put upon his feet
by the marriage; and the Countess was so keen about
it, that there was nothing in the way of innocent in-
trigue which she would not have done to accomplish
it. She knew that George Hotspur was a rake, was
a gambler, was in debt, was hampered by other diffi-
culties, and all the rest of it; but she liked the man,
and was therefore willing to believe that a rich mar-
riage would put it all right. Emily Hotspur was no-
thing to her, nor was Sir Harry; but George had often
made her own house pleasant to her, and therefore, to
her thinking, deserved a wife with £20,000 a year.
And then, if there might have been scruples under
other circumstances, that fact of the baronetcy over-
came them. It could not be wrong in one placed
as was Lady Altringham to assist in preventing any
separation of the title and the property. Of course
George might probably squander all that he could
squander; but that might be made right by settlements
and entails. Lady Altringham was much more ener-
getic than her husband, and had made out quite a plan
of the manner in which George should proceed. She
discussed the matter with him at great length. The
one difficulty she was, indeed, obliged to slur over;
but even that was not altogether omitted in her scheme.
“Whatever incumbrances there may be, free yourself
from them at once,” she had advised.

<#PG# 72>
69
“That is so very easy to say, Lady Altringham,
but so difficult to do.”
“As to debts, of course they can't be paid without
money. Sir Harry will find it worth his while to
settle any debts. But if there is anything else, stop
it at once.” Of course there was something else, and
of course Lady Altringham knew what that something
else was. She demanded, in accordance with her
scheme, that George should lose no time. This was
in May. It was known that Sir Harry intended to
leave town early in June. “Of course you will take
him at his word, and go to Humblethwaite when you
leave us,” she had said.
“No time has been named.”
“Then you can name your own without difficulty.
You will write from Castle Corry and say you are
coming. That is, if it's not all settled by that time.
Of course, it cannot be done in a minute, because Sir
Harry must consent; but I should begin at once,
only, Captain Hotspur, leave nothing for them to find
out afterwards. What is past they will forgive.” Such
had been Lady Altringham's advice, and no doubt she
understood the matter which she had been discussing.
When George Hotspur entered the room, his cousin
was dancing with a prince. He could see her as he
stood speaking a few words to Lady Elizabeth. And
in talking to Lady Elizabeth he did not talk as a
stranger would, or a common guest. He had quite

<#PG# 73>
70
understood all that he might gain by assuming the
intimacy of cousinhood, and he had assumed it. Lady
Elizabeth was less weary than before when he stood
by her, and accepted from his hand some little trifle
of help, which was agreeable to her. And he showed
himself in no hurry, and told her some little story that
pleased her. What a pity it was that Cousin George
should be a scamp, she thought, as he went on to
greet Sir Harry.
And with Sir Harry he remained a minute or two.
On such an occasion as this Sir Harry was all smiles,
and quite willing to hear a little town gossip. “Come
with the Altringhams, have you? I'm told Altring-
ham has just sold all his horses. What's the meaning
of that?”
“The old story, Sir Harry. He has weeded his
stable, and got the buyers to think that they were
getting the cream. There isn't a man in England
knows better what he's about than Altringham.”
Sir Harry smiled his sweetest, and answered with
some good-humoured remark, but he said in his heart
that “birds of a feather flock together," and that his
cousin was-not a man of honour..
There are some things that no rogue can do. He
can understand what it is to condemn roguery, to
avoid it, to dislike it, to disbelieve in it;—but he can-
not understand what it is to hate it. Cousin George
had probably exaggerated the transaction of which

<#PG# 74>
71
he had spoken, but he had little thought that in doing
so he had helped to imbue Sir Harry with a true idea
of his own character.
George passed on, and saw his cousin, who was
now standing up with a foreign ambassador. He just
spoke to her as he passed her, calling her by her 1?
Christian name as he did so. She gave him her hand
ever so graciously; and he, when he had gone on, re-
turned and asked her to name a dance.
“But I don't think I've one left that I mean to
dance,” she said.
“Then give me one that you don't mean to dance,"
he answered. And of course she gave it to him.
It was an hour afterwards that he came to claim
her promise, and she put her arm through his and
stood up with him. There was no talk then of her
not dancing, and she went whirling round the room
with him in great bliss. Cousin George waltzed well.
All such men do. It is a part of their-stock-in-trade.
On this evening Emily Hotspur thought that he waltzed
better than any one else, and told him so. “Another
turn? Of course I will with you, because you know
what you're about.”
“I'd blush if I'd time,” said he.
“A great many gentlemen ought to blush, I know.
That prince, whose name I always forget, and you,
are the only men in the room who dance well, accord-
ing to my ideas."

<#PG# 75>
72
Then off they went again, and Emily was very
happy. He could at least dance well, and there could
be no reason why she should not enjoy his dancing
well since he had been considered to be white enough
to be asked to the ball.
But with George there was present at every turn
and twist of the dance an idea that he was there for
other work than that. He was tracking a head of
game after which there would be many hunters. He
had his advantages, and so would they have theirs.
One of his was this,—that he had her there with him
now, and he must use it. She would not fall into his
mouth merely by being whirled round the room
pleasantly. At last she was still, and consented to
take a walk with him out of the room, somewhere out
amidst the crowd, on the staircase if possible, so as to
get a breath of fresh air. Of course he soon had her
jammed into a corner out of which there was no im-
mediate mode of escape.
“We shall never get away again,” she said, laugh-
ing. Had she wanted to get away her tone and manner
would have been very different.
“I wonder whether you feel yourself to be the same
sort of person here that you are at Humblethwaite,”
he said.
“Exactly the same.”
“To me you seem to be so different.”
“In what way?”

<#PG# 76>
“I don't think you are half so nice."
“How very unkind!”
Of course she was flattered. Of all flattery praise
is the coarsest and least efficacious. When you would
flatter a man, talk to him about himself, and criticise
him, pulling him to pieces by comparison of some
small present fault with his past conduct;-—and the:
rule holds the same with a woman. To tell her that:
she looks well is feeble work; but complain to her:
wofully that there is something wanting at the present:
moment, something lacking from the usual high
standard, some temporary loss of beauty, and your
solicitude will prevail with her.
"And in what am I not nice? I am sure I'm trying
to be as nice as I know how."
“Down at Humblethwaite you are simply yourself,
-Emily Hotspur."
. “And what am I here?”
“That formidable thing, -a success. Don't you
feel yourself that you are liſted a little off your legs?"
“Not a bit;—not an inch. Why should I?”
“I fail to make you understand quite what I mean.
Don't you feel that with all these princes and poten-
tates you are forced to be something else than your
natural self? Don't you know that you have to put
on a special manner, and to talk in a special way?
Does not the champagne fly to your head, more or
less?"

<#PG# 77>
74
“Of course, the princes and potentates are not the
same as old Mrs. Crutchley, if you mean that.”
“I am not blaming you, you know, only I cannot
help being very anxious; and I found you so perfect
at Humblethwaite that. I cannot say that I like any
change. You know I am to come to Humblethwaite
again?”
“Of course you are."
“You go down next month, I believe?”
“Papa talks of going to Scarrowby for a few weeks.
He always does every year, and it is so dull. Did you
ever see Scarrowby?”
“Never.”
“You ought to come there some day. You know
one branch of the Hotspurs did live there for ever so
long."
“Is it a good house?”
“Very bad indeed; but there are enormous woods,
and the country is very wild, and everything is at
sixes and sevens. However, of course you would not
come, because it is in the middle of your London
season. There would be ever so many things to keep
you. You are a man who, I suppose, never was out
of London in June in your life, unless some race
meeting was going on.”
“Do you really take me for such as that, Emily?”
“Yes, I do. That is what they tell me you are.
Is it not true? Don't you go to races?”

<#PG# 78>
75
“I should be quite willing to undertake never to
put my foot on a racecourse again this minute. I will
do so now if you will only ask it of me.”
She paused a moment, half thinking that she would
ask it, but at last she determined against it.
“No," she said; "if you think it proper to stay
away, you can do so without my asking it. I have
no right to make such a request. If you think races
are bad, why don't you stay away of your own ac-
cord?”
“They are bad,” he said.
“Then why do you go to them?”
“They are bad, and I do go to them. They are
very bad, and I go to them very often. But I will
stay away and never put my foot on another race-
course if you, my cousin, will ask me.”
“That is nonsense.”
“Try me. It shall not be nonsense. If you care
enough about me to wish to save me from what is
evil, you can do it. I care enough about you to give
up the pursuit at your bidding."
As he said this he looked down into her eyes, and
she knew that the full weight of his gaze was upon
her. She knew that his words and his looks together
were intended to impress her with some feeling of his
love for her. She knew at the moment, too, that they
gratified her. And she remembered also in the same
moment that her Cousin George was a black sheep.

<#PG# 79>
36
"If you cannot refrain from what is bad without
my asking you,” she said, “your refraining will do no
good.”
He was making her some answer, when she insisted
on being taken away. “I must get into the dancing-
room; I must indeed, George. I have already thrown
over some poor wretch. No, not yet, I see, however.
I was not engaged for the quadrille; but I must go
back and look after the people.”
He led her back through the crowd; and as he did
so he perceived that Sir Harry's eyes were fixed upon
him. He did not much care for that. If he could
carry his Cousin Emily, he thought that he might carry
the Baronet also.
He could not get any special word with her again
that night. He asked her for another dance, but she
would not grant it to him. “You forget the princes
and potentates to whom I have to attend,” she said
to him, quoting his own words.
He did not blame her, even to himself, judging by
the importance which he attached to every word of
private conversation which he could have with her,
that she found it to be equally important. It was
something gained that she should know that he was
thinking of her. He could not be to her now like any
cousin, or any other man, with whom she might dance
three or four times without meaning anything. As he

<#PG# 80>
77
was aware of it, so must she be; and he was glad that
she should feel that it was so.
“Emily tells me that you are going to Scarrowby
next month," he said afterwards to Sir Harry.
Sir Harry frowned, and answered him very shortly,
“Yes, we shall go there in June.”
“Is it a large place?”.
“Large? How do you mean? It is a good prop-
erty.”
“But the house?”
“The house is quite large enough for us,” said Sir
Harry; "but we do not have company there.”
This was said in a very cold tone, and there was
nothing more to be added. George, to do him justice,
had not been fishing for an invitation to Scarrowby.
He had simply been making conversation with the
Baronet. It would not have suited him to go to Scar-
rowby, because by doing so he would have lost the
power of renewing his visit to Humblethwaite. But
Sir Harry in this interview had been so very ungracious,
—and as George knew very well, because of the scene
in the corner,--that there might be a doubt whether
he would ever get to Humblethwaite at all. If he
failed, however, it should not be for the want of
audacity on his own part.
But, in truth, Sir Harry's blackness was still the
result of vacillation. Though he would fain redeem
this prodigal, if it were possible, and give him every-

<#PG# 81>
78
thing that was to be given; yet, when he saw the
prodigal attempting to help himself to the good things,
his wrath was aroused. George Hotspur, as he betook
himself from Bruton Street to such other amusements
as were at his command, meditated much over his
position. He thought he could give up the racecourses;
but he was sure that he could at any rate say that he
would give them up.

<#PG# 82>
CHAPTER VII.
Lady Altringham.
THERE was one more meeting between Cousin
George and Emily Hotspur, before Sir Harry left Lon-
don with his wife and daughter. On the Sunday after-
noon following the ball he called in Bruton Street, and
found Lord Alfred there. He knew that Lord Alfred
had been refused, and felt it to be a matter of course
that the suit would be pressed again. Nevertheless, he
was quite free from animosity to Lord Alfred. He
could see at a glance that there was no danger for
him on that side. Lord Alfred was talking to Lady
Elizabeth when he entered, and Emily was engaged
with a bald-headed old gentleman with a little ribbon
and a star. The bald-headed old gentleman soon
departed, and then Cousin George, in some skilfully
indirect way, took an opportunity of letting Emily know
that he should not go to Goodwood this July.
“Not go to Goodwood?” said she, pretending to
laugh. “It will be most unnatural, will it not?
They'll hardly start the horses without you, I should
think.”
“They'll have to start them without me, at any
rate.” Of course she understood what he meant, and

<#PG# 83>
80
understood also why he had told her. But if his
promise were true, so much good had been done,—and
she sincerely believed that it was true. In what way
could he make love to her better than by refraining
from his evil ways for the sake of pleasing her? Other
bald-headed old gentlemen and bewigged old ladies
came in, and he had not time for another word. He
bade her adieu, saying nothing now of his hope of
meeting her in the autumn, and was very affectionate
in his farewell to Lady Elizabeth. “I don't suppose
I shall see Sir Harry before he starts. Say 'good-bye'
for me.”
"I will, George.”
“I am so sorry you are going. It has been so
jolly, coming in here of a Sunday, Lady Elizabeth,
and you have been so good to me. I wish Scarrowby
was at the bottom of the sea.”
“Sir Harry wouldn't like that at all.”
“I dare say not. And as such places must be, I
suppose they ought to be looked after. Only why in
June? Good-bye! We shall meet again some day,”
But not a word was said about Humblethwaite in Sep-
tember. He did not choose to mention the prospect
of his autumn visit, and she did not dare to do so.
Şir Harry had not renewed the offer, and she would
not venture to do so in Sir Harry's absence.
June passed away, -as Junes do pass in London,--
very gaily in appearance, very quickly in reality, with

<#PG# 84>
:
81
a huge outlay of money and an enormous amount of
disappointment. Young ladies would not accept, and
young men would not propose. Papas became cross
and stingy, and mammas insinuated that daughters
were misbehaving. The daughters fought their own
battles, and became tired in the fighting of them, and
many a one had declared to herself before July had
come to an end that it was all vanity and vexation of
spirit.
The Altringhams always went to Goodwood,--hus-
band and wife. Goodwood and Ascot for Lady
Altringham were festivals quite as sacred as were Epsom
and Newmarket for the Earl. She looked forward to
them all the year, learned all she could about the
horses which were to run, was very anxious and ener-
getic about her party, and, if all that was said was
true, had her little book. It was an institution also
that George Hotspur should be one of the party; and
of all the arrangements usually made, it was not the
one which her Ladyship could dispense with the easiest.
George knew exactly what she liked to have done, and
how. The Earl himself would take no trouble, and
desired simply to be taken there and back and to find
everything that was wanted the very moment it was
needed. And in all such matters the Countess chose
that the Earl should be indulged. But it was necessary
to have some one who would look after something-
who would direct the servants, and give the orders
Sir Harry Potspur.

<#PG# 85>
82
and be responsible. George Hotspur did it all ad-
mirably, and on such occasions earned the hospitality
which was given to him throughout the year. At Good-
wood he was almost indispensable to Lady Altringham;
but for this meeting she was willing to dispense with
him. “I tell you, Captain Hotspur, that you're not to
'go,” she said to him.
“Nonsense, Lady Altringham.”
“What a child you are! Don't you know what
depends on it?"
“It does not depend on that.”
“It may. Every little helps. Didn't you promise
her that you wouldn't?”.
“She didn't take it in earnest.”
“I tell you, you know nothing about a woman.
She will take it very much in earnest if you break your
word.”
“She'll never know.”
“She will. She'll learn it. A girl that learns every-
thing. Don't go; and let her know that you have not
gone."
· George Hotspur thought that he might go, and yet
let her know that he had not gone. An accomplished
and successful lie was to him a thing beautiful in itself,
an event that had come off usefully, a piece of
strategy that was evidence of skill, so much gained on
the world at the least possible outlay, an investment
from which had come profit without capital. Lady

<#PG# 86>
83
Altringham was very hard on him, threatening him at
one time with the Earl's displeasure, and absolute
refusal of his company. But he pleaded hard that his
book would be ruinous to him if he did not go; that
this was a pursuit of such a kind that a man could not
give it up all of a moment; that he would take care
that his name was omitted from the printed list of
Lord Altringham's party; and that he ought to be
allowed this last recreation. The Countess at last gave
way, and George Hotspur did go to Goodwood.
With the success or failure of his book on that
occasion our story is not concerned. He was still
more flush of cash than usual, having something left
of his cousin's generous present. At any rate, he
came to no signal ruin at the races, and left London
for Castle Corry on the Ioth of August without any
known diminution to his prospects. At that time the
Hotspurs were at Humblethwaite with a party; but
it had been already decided that George should not
prepare to make his visit till September. He was to
write from Castle Corry. All that had been arranged
between him and the Countess, and from Castle Corry
he did write:-
“DEAR LADY ELIZABETH, --Sir Harry was kind
enough to say last winter that I might come to Hum-
blethwaite again this autumn. Will you be able to take
me in on the 2nd September? we have about finished
. 6*

<#PG# 87>
84
with Altringham's house, and Lady A. has had enough
of me. They remain here till the end of this month.
With kind regards to Sir Harry and Emily;
“Believe me, yours always,
“GEORGE HOTSPUR."
Nothing could be simpler than this note, and yet
every word of it had been weighed and dictated by
Lady Altringham. “That won't do at all. You mustn't
seem to be so eager," she had said, when he showed
her the letter as prepared by himself. “Just write as
you would do if you were coming here.” Then she
sat down, and made the copy for him.
There was very great doubt and there was much
deliberation over that note at Humblethwaite. The
invitation had doubtless been given, and Sir Harry did
not wish to turn against his own flesh and blood,—to
deny admittance to his house to the man who was
the heir to his title. Were he to do so, he must give
some reason; he must declare some quarrel; he must
say boldly that all intercourse between them was to
be at an end; and he must inform Cousin George
that this strong step was taken because Cousin George
was a-blackguard! There was no other way of escape
left. And then Cousin George had done nothing since
the days of the London intimacies to warrant such
treatment; he had at least done nothing to warrant
such treatment at the hands of Sir Harry. And yet

<#PG# 88>
85
Sir Harry thoroughly wished that his cousin was at
Jerusalem. He still vacillated, but his vacillation did
not bring him nearer to his cousin's side of the case.
Every little thing that he saw and heard made him
know that his cousin was a man to whom he could
not give his daughter even for the sake of the family,
without abandoning his duty to his child. At this i
moment, while he was considering George's letter, it
was quite clear to him that George should not be his
son-in-law; and yet the fact that the property and the
title might be brought together was not absent from
his mind when he gave his final assent. “I don't sup-
pose she cares for him,” he said to his wife.
“She's not in love with him, if you mean that.”
“What else should I mean?” he said, crossly.
“She may learn to be in love with him.”
“She had better not. She must be told. He may
come for a week. I won't have him here for longer.
Write to him and say that we shall be happy to have
him from the second to the ninth. Emily must be
told that I disapprove of him, but that I can't avoid
opening my house to him.”
These were the most severe words he had ever
spoken about Cousin George, but then the occasion
had become very critical. Lady Elizabeth's reply was
as follows:-
“MY DEAR COUSIN GEORGE,—Sir Harry and I will

<#PG# 89>
86
be very happy to have you on the second, as you pro-
pose, and hope you will stay till the eleventh.
“Yours sincerely,
“ELIZABETH HOTSPUR.”
He was to come on a Saturday, but she did not
like to tell him to go on a Saturday, because of the
following day. Where could the poor fellow be on
the Sunday? She therefore stretched her invitation
for two days beyond the period sanctioned by Sir
Harry.
“It's not very gracious,” said George, as he showed
the note to Lady Altringham.
“I don't like it the less on that account. It shows
that they're afraid about her, and they wouldn't be
afraid without cause.”
“There is not much of that, I fancy.”
“They oughtn't to have a chance against you,-
not if you play your game well. Even in ordinary
cases the fathers and mothers are beaten by the lovers
nine times out of ten. It is only when the men are
oafs and louts that they are driven off. But with you,
with your cousinship, and half-heirship, and all your
practice, and the family likeness, and the rest of it, if
you only take a little trouble”.
“I'll take any amount of trouble.”
“No, you won't. You'll deny yourself nothing,
and go through no ordeal that is disagreeable to you.

<#PG# 90>
I don't suppose your things are a bit better arranged
in London than they were in the spring.” She looked
at him as though waiting for an answer, but he was
silent. “It's too late for anything of that kind now,
but still you may do very much. Make up your mind'
to this, that you'll ask Miss Hotspur to be your wife
before you leave—what's the name of the place?”
“I have quite made up my mind to that, Lady
Altringham.”
“As to the manner of doing it, I don't suppose that
I can teach you anything."
“I don't know about that.”
“At any rate I shan't try. Only remember this.
Get her to promise to be firm, and then go at once
to Sir Harry. Don't let there be an appearance of
doubt in speaking to him. And if he tells you of the
property,--angrily I mean,—then do you tell him of
the title. Make him understand that you give as
much as you get. I don't suppose he will yield at
first. Why should he? You are not the very best
young man about town, you know. But if you get
her, he must follow. She looks like one that would
stick to it, if she once had said it.”
Thus prompted George Hotspur went from Castle
Corry to Humblethwaite. I wonder whether he was
aware of the extent of the friendship of his friend,
and whether he ever considered why it was that such
a woman should be so anxious to assist him in making

<#PG# 91>
88
his fortune, let it be at what cost it might to others!
Lady Altringham was not the least in love with Captain
Hotspur, was bound to him by no tie whatsoever,
would suffer no loss in the world should Cousin George
come to utter and incurable ruin; but she was a woman
of energy, and, as she liked the man, she was zealous
in his friendship.

<#PG# 92>
CHAPTER VIII.
Airey Force.
LADY ELIZABETH had been instructed by Sir Harry
to warn her daughter not to fall in love with Cousin
George during his visit to Humblethwaite; and Lady
Elizabeth was, as a wife, accustomed to obey her
husband in all things. But obedience in this matter
was very difficult. Such a caution as that received is
not easily given even between a mother and a child,
and is especially difficult when the mother is uncon-
sciously aware of her child's superiority to herself.
Emily was in all respects the bigger woman of the two,
and was sure to get the best of it in any such caution-
ing. It is so hard to have to bid a girl, and a good
girl too, not to fall in love with a particular man!
There is left among us at any rate so much of reserve
and assumed delicacy as to require us to consider, or
pretend to consider on the girl's behalf, that of course
she won't fall in love. We know that she will, sooner
or later; and probably as much sooner as opportunityl
may offer. That is our experience of the genus girl
in the general; and we quite approve of her for her
readiness to do so. It is, indeed, her nature; and the
propensity has been planted in her for wise purposes.

<#PG# 93>
90
But as to this or that special sample of the genus girl,
in reference to this or that special sample of the genus
young man, we always feel ourselves bound to take it
as a matter of course that there can be nothing of the
kind, till the thing is done. Any caution on the
matter is therefore difficult and disagreeable, as con-
veying almost an insult. Mothers in well-regulated
families do not caution their daughters in reference to
special young men. But Lady Elizabeth had been de-:
sired by her husband to give the caution, and must in
some sort obey the instruction. Two days before
George's arrival she endeavoured to do as she was told;
not with the most signal success.
“Your Cousin George is coming on Saturday.”
“So I heard Papa say.”
“Your Papa gave him a sort of invitation when he
was here last time, and so he has proposed himself.”
“Why should not he? It seems very natural. He
is the nearest relation we have got, and we all like
him.”
“I don't think your Papa does like him.”
“I do.”
“What I mean is your Papa doesn't approve of
him. He goes to races, and bets, and all that kind of
thing. And then your Papa thinks that he's over head
and ears in debt.”
“I don't know anything about his debts.” As for
his going to races, I believe he has given them up.

<#PG# 94>
91
I am sure he would if he were asked.” Then there
was a pause, for Lady Elizabeth hardly knew how to
pronounce her caution. “Why shouldn't Papa pay his
debts?”
“My dear!”
“Well, Mamma, why shouldn't he? And why
shouldn't Papa let him have the property; I mean,
leave it to him instead of to me?”
“If your brother had lived— ”
“He didn't live, Mamma. That has been our
great misfortune. But so it is; and why shouldn't
George be allowed to take his place? I'm sure it
would be for the best. Papa thinks so much about
the name, and the family, and all that.”
“My dear, you must leave him to do as he thinks
fit in all such matters. You may be sure that he will
do what he believes to be his duty. What I was going
to say was this—-" And, instead of saying it, Lady
Elizabeth still hesitated.
“I know what you want to say, Mamma, just as
well as though the words were out of your mouth.
You want to make me to understand that George is a
black sheep."
“I'm afraid he is.”.
“But black sheep are not like blackamoors; they
may be washed white. You said so yourself the other
day.”
“Did I, my dear?”

<#PG# 95>
92
“Certainly you did; and certainly they may. Why,
Mamma, what is all religion but the washing of black
sheep white; making the black a little less black, scrap-
ing a spot white here and there?”
; “I am afraid your Cousin George is beyond wash-
ing.”
“Then Mamma, all I can say is, he oughtn't to
come here. Mind, I think you wrong him. I dare-
say he has been giddy and fond of pleasure; but if he
is so bad as you say, Papa should tell him at once not
to come. As far as I am concerned, I don't believe
he is so bad; and I shall be glad to see him.”
There was no cautioning a young woman who
could reason in this way, and who could look at her
mother as Emily looked. It was not, at least, within
the power of Lady Elizabeth to do so. And yet she
could not tell Sir Harry of her failure. She thought
that she had expressed the caution; and she thought
also that her daughter would be wise enough to be
guided ,--not by her mother's wisdom, but by the
words of her father. Poor dear woman! She was
thinking of it every hour of the day; but she said no-
thing more on the subject, either to her daughter or to
Sir Harry.
The black sheep came, and made one of a number
of numerous visitors. It had been felt that the danger
would be less among a multitude; and there was present
a very excellent young man, as to whom there were

<#PG# 96>
93
hopes. Steps had not been taken about this excellent
young man as had been done in reference to Lord
Alfred; but still there were hopes. He was the eldest
son of a Lincolnshire squire, a man of fair property
and undoubted family; but who, it was thought, would
not object to merge the name of Thoresby in that of
Hotspur. Nothing came of the young man, who was
bashful, and to whom Miss Hotspur certainly gave no
entertainment of a nature to remove his bashfulness.
But when the day for George's coming had been fixed,
Sir Harry thought it expedient to write to young
Thoresby and accelerate a visit which had been previ-
ously proposed. Sir Harry as he did so almost hated
himself for his anxiety to dispose of his daughter. He
was a gentleman, every inch of him; and he thoroughly
desired to do his duty. He knew, however, that there
was much in his feelings of which he could not but be
ashamed. And yet, if something were not done to
assist his girl in a right disposal of all that she had to
bestow with her hand, how was it probable that it
could be disposed aright?
The black sheep came, and found young Thoresby
and some dozen other strangers in the house. He
smiled upon them all, and before the first evening
was over had made himself the popular man of the
house. Sir Harry, like a fool as he was, had given
his cousin only two fingers, and had looked black at
their first meeting. Nothing could be gained by con-

<#PG# 97>
94
duct such as that with such a guest. Before the gen-
tlemen left the dinner-table on the first day even
he had smiled and joked and had asked questions
about “Altringham's mountains.” “The worst of
you fellows who go to Scotland is that you care
nothing for real sport when you come down south
afterwards." All this conversation about Lord Al-
tringham's grouse and the Scotch mountains helped
George Hotspur, so that when he went into the
drawing-room he was in the ascendant. Many men
have learned the value of such ascendancy, and most
men have known the want of it.
Poor Lady Elizabeth had not a chance with Cousin
George. She succumbed to him at once, not knowing
why, but feeling that she herself became bright,
amusing, and happy when talking to him. She was
a woman not given to familiarities; but she did
; become familiar with him, allowing him little liberties
of expression which no other man would take with
her, and putting them all down to the score of cousin-
hood. He might be a black sheep. She feared there
could be but little doubt that he was one. But, from
her worsted-work up to the demerits of her dearest
friend, he did know how to talk better than any other
young man she knew. To Emily, on that first evening,
he said very little. When he first met her he had
pressed her hand, and looked into her eyes, and
smiled on her with a smile so sweet that it was as

<#PG# 98>
95
though a god had smiled on her. She had made up
her mind that he should be nothing to her,-nothing
beyond a dear cousin; nevertheless, her eye had
watched him during the whole hour of dinner, and,
not knowing that it was so, she had waited for his
coming to them in the evening. Heavens and earth!
what an oaf was that young Thoresby as the two stood
together near the door! She did not want her cousin
to come and talk to her, but she listened and laughed
within herself as she saw how pleased was her mother
by the attentions of the black sheep.
• One word Cousin George did say to Emily Hotspur
that night, just as the ladies were leaving the room.
It was said in a whisper, with a little laugh, with that
air of half joke half earnest which may be so effica-
cious in conversation: “I did not go to Goodwood,
after all.”
She raised her eyes to his for a quarter of a second,
thanking him for his goodness in refraining. “I don't
believe that he is really a black sheep at all,” she said
to herself that night, as she laid her head upon her
pillow.
After all, the devil fights under great disadvantages,
and has to carry weights in all his races which are
almost unfair. He lies as a matter of course, believ-
ing thoroughly in lies, thinking that it is by lies chiefly
that he must make his running good; and yet every
lie he tells, after it has been told and used, remains

<#PG# 99>
96
as an additional weight to be carried. When you
have used your lie gracefully and successfully, it is
hard to bury it and get it well out of sight. It crops
up here and there against you, requiring more lies;
and at last, too often, has to be admitted as a lie,
most usually so admitted in silence, but still admitted,
-to be forgiven or not, according to the circum-
stances of the case. The most perfect forgiveness is
that which is extended to him who is known to lie in
everything. The man has to be taken, lies and all, as
a man is taken with a squint, or a harelip, or a bad
temper. He has an uphill game to fight, but when
once well known, he does not fall into the difficulty
of being believed.
George Hotspur's lie was believed. To our readers
it may appear to have been most gratuitous, unne-
cessary, and inexpedient. The girl would not have
quarrelled with him for going to the races,--would
never have asked anything about it. But George
knew that he must make his running. It would not
suffice that she should not quarrel with him. He had
to win her, and it came so natural to him to lie! And
the lie was efficacious; she was glad to know that he
stayed away from the races-for her sake. Had it
not been for her sake? She would not bid him stay
away, but she was so glad that he had stayed! The
lie was very useful;—if it only could have been buried
: and put out of sight when used!

<#PG# 100>
97
There was partridge-shooting for four days; not
good shooting, but work which carried the men far
from home, and enabled Sir Harry to look after his
cousin. George, so looked after, did not dare to say
that on any day he would shirk the shooting. But Sir
Harry, as he watched his cousin, gradually lost his
keenness for watching him. Might it not be best that
he should let matters arrange themselves? This young
squire from Lincolnshire was evidently an oaf. Sir
Harry could not even cherish a hope on that side.
His girl was very good, and she had been told, and
the work of watching went so much against the grain
with him! And then, added to it all, was the remem-
brance that if the worst came to the worst, the title
and property would be kept together. George Hotspur *
might have fought his fight, we think, without the aid
of his lie.
On the Friday the party was to some extent broken
up. The oaf and sundry other persons went away.
Sir Harry had thought that the cousin would go on
the Saturday, and had been angry with his wife be-
cause his orders on that head had not been implicitly
obeyed. But when the Friday came, and George
offered to go in with him to Penrith, to hear some
case of fish-poaching which was to be brought before
the magistrates, he had forgiven the offence. George
had a great deal to say about fish, and then went on
to say a good deal about himself. If he could only
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 101>
98
get some employment, a farm, say, where he might
have hunting, how good it would be! For he did not
pretend to any virtuous abnegation of the pleasures of
the world, but was willing,—so he said, -to add to
them some little attempt to earn his own bread. On
this day Sir Harry liked his cousin better than he had
ever done before, though he did not even then place
the least confidence in his cousin's sincerity as to the
farm and the earning of bread.
On their return to the Hall on Friday they found
that a party had been made to go to Ulleswater on
the Saturday. A certain Mrs. Fitzpatrick was staying
in the house, who had never seen the lake, and the
carriage was to take them to Airey Force Airey
Force, as everybody knows, is a waterfall near to the
shores of the lake, and is the great lion of the Lake
scenery on that side of the mountains. The waterfall
was full fifteen miles from Humblethwaite, but the
distance had been done before, and could be done
again. Emily, Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and two other young
ladies were to go. Mr. Fitzpatrick would sit on the
box. There was a youth there also who had left
school and not yet gone to college. He was to be
allowed to drive a dog-cart. Of course George Hotspur
was ready to go in the dog-cart with him.
George had determined from the commencement of
his visit, when he began to foresee that this Saturday
would be more at his command than any other day,

<#PG# 102>
99
that on this Saturday he would make or mar his for-
tune for life. He had perceived that his cousin was
cautious with him, that he would be allowed but little
scope for love-making, that she was in some sort
afraid of him; but he perceived also that in a quiet
undemonstrative way she was very gracious to him.
She never ignored him, as young ladies will some-
times ignore young men, but thought of him even in
his absence, and was solicitous for his comfort. He
was clever enough to read little signs, and was sure at
any rate that she liked him.
“Why did you not postpone the party till George
was gone?” Sir Harry said to his wife.
“The Fitzpatricks also go on Monday,” she an-
swered, “and we could not refuse them.”
Then again it occurred to Sir Harry that life would
not be worth having if he was to be afraid to allow
his daughter to go to a picnic in company with her
cousin.
There is a bridge across the water at the top of 7
Airey Force, which is perhaps one of the prettiest
spots in the whole of our Lake country. The entire
party on their arrival of course went up to the bridge,
and then the entire party of course descended. How
it happened that in the course of the afternoon
George and Emily were there again, and were there
unattended, who can tell? If she had meant to be
cautious, she must very much have changed her plans

<#PG# 103>
100
in allowing herself to be led thither. And as he stood
there, with no eye resting on them, his arm was round
her waist and she was pressed to his side.
"Dearest, dearest," he said, “may I believe that
you love me?"
“I have said so. You may believe it if you
will.”
She did not attempt to make the distance greater
between them. She leant against him willingly.
“Dear George, I do love you. My choice has
been made. I have to trust to you for everything."
“You shall never trust in vain," he said.
“You must reform, you know,” she said, turning
round and looking up into his face with a smile.
“They say that you have been wild. You must not
be wild any more, sir.”
“I will reform. I have reformed. I say it boldly;
I have become an altered man since I knew you. I
have lived with one hope, and even the hope alone
has changed me. Now I have got all that I have
hoped for. Oh, Emily, I wish you knew how much I
love you!"
They were there on the bridge, or roaming together
alone among the woods, for nearly an hour after that,
till Mrs. Fitzpatrick, who knew the value of the prize
and the nature of the man, began to fear that she had
been remiss in her duty as chaperon. As Emily came
down and joined the party at last, she was perfectly

<#PG# 104>
ΙΟΙ
regardless either of their frowns or smiles. There had
been one last compact made between the lovers.
“George,” she had said, “whatever it may cost us,
let there be no secrets.”
“Of course not,” he replied.
“I will tell Mamma to-night; and you must tell
Papa. You will promise me?”
“Certainly. It is what I should insist on doing
myself. I could not stay in his house under other
circumstances. But you too must promise me one
thing, Emily.”
“What is it?"
“You will be true to me, even though he should
refuse his consent?”
She paused before she answered him.
“I will be true to you. I cannot be otherwise than
true to you. My love was a thing to give, but when
given I cannot take it back. I will be true to you,
but of course we cannot be married unless Papa
consents."
He urged her no further. He was too wise to think
it possible that he could do so without injuring his
cause. Then they found the others, and Emily made
her apologies to Mrs. Fitzpatrick for the delay with a
quiet dignity that struck her Cousin George almost
with awe. How had it been that such a one as he
had won so great a creature?
George, as he was driven home by his young com-

<#PG# 105>
102
panion, was full of joyous chatter and light small talk.
He had done a good stroke of business, and was
happy. If only the Baronet could be brought round,
all the troubles which had enveloped him since a beard
had first begun to grow on his chin would disappear
as a mist beneath the full rays of the sun; or even if
there still might be a trouble or two,—and as he thought
of his prospects he remembered that they could not all
be made to disappear in the mist fashion,—there would
be that which would gild the clouds. At any rate he
had done a good stroke of business. And he loved
the girl too. He thought that of all the girls he had
seen about town, or about the country either, she was
the bonniest and the brightest and the most clever. It
might well have been that a poor devil like he in search
of an heiress might have been forced to put up with
personal disadvantages,—with age, with plain looks,
with vulgar manners, with low birth; but here, so
excellent was his fortune, there was everything which
fortune could give! Love her? Of course he loved
her. He would do anything on earth for her. And
how jolly they would be together when they got hold
of their share of that £20,000 a year! And how jolly
it would be to owe nothing to anybody! As he thought
of this, however, there came upon him the reminiscence
of a certain Captain Stubber, and the further remi-
niscence of a certain Mr. Abraham Hart, with both
of whom he had dealings; and he told himself that it

<#PG# 106>
103
would behove him to call up all his pluck when
discussing those gentlemen and their dealings, with
the Baronet. He was sure that the Baronet would not
like Captain Stubber nor Mr. Hart, and that a good
deal of pluck would be needed. But on the whole he
had done a great stroke of business; and, as a con-
sequence of his success, talked and chatted all the way
home, till the youth who was driving him thought that
George was about the nicest fellow that he had ever
met.
Emily Hotspur, as she took her place in the carriage,
was very silent. She also had much of which to think,
much on which-as she dreamed—to congratulate
herself. But she could not think of it and talk at the
same time. She had made her little apology with
graceful ease. She had just smiled,—but the smile
was almost a rebuke,—when one of her companions
had ventured on the beginning of some little joke as
to her company, and then she had led the way to the
carriage. Mrs. Fitzpatrick and the two girls were
nothing to her now, let them suspect what they chose
or say what they might. She had given herself away,
and she triumphed in the surrender. The spot on
which he had told her of his love should be sacred to
her for ever. It was a joy to her that it was near to
her own home, the home that she would give to him,
so that she might go there with him again and again.
She had very much to consider and to remember. A

<#PG# 107>
104
black sheep! No! Of all the flock he should be the
least black. It might be that in the energy of his
pleasures he had exceeded other men, as he did exceed
all other men in everything that he did and said. Who
was so clever? who so bright? who so handsome, so
full of poetry and of manly grace? How sweet was his
voice, how fine his gait, how gracious his smile! And
then in his brow there was that look of command which
she had ever recognized in her father's face as belong-
ing to his yace as a Hotspur,-only added to it was a
godlike beauty which her father never could have
possessed.
She did not conceal from herself that there might
be trouble with her father. And yet she was not sure
but that upon the whole he would be pleased after a
while. Humblethwaite and the family honours would
still go together, if he would sanction this marriage;
and she knew how he longed in his heart that it might
be so. For a time probably he might be averse to her
prayers. Should it be so, she would simply give him
her word that she would never during his lifetime
marry without his permission,—and then she would
be true to her troth. As to her truth in that respect
there could be no doubt. She had given her word;
and that, for a Hotspur, must be enough.
She could not talk as she thought of all this, and
therefore had hardly spoken when George appeared at
the carriage door to give the ladies a hand as they came

<#PG# 108>
105
into the house. To her he was able to give one gentle
pressure as she passed on; but she did not speak to
him, nor was it necessary that she should do so. Had
not everything been said already?

<#PG# 109>
106
CHAPTER IX.
“I know what you are."
1.
The scene which took place that night between
the mother and daughter may be easily conceived.
Emily told her tale, and told it in a manner which left
no doubt of her persistency. She certainly meant it.
Lady Elizabeth had almost expected it. There are
evils which may come or may not; but as to which,
though we tell ourselves that they may still be avoided,
we are inwardly almost sure that they will come. Such
an evil in the mind of Lady Elizabeth had been Cousin
George. Not but what she herself would have liked
him for a son-in-law had it not been so certain that he
was a black sheep.
“Your father will never consent to it, my dear."
“Of course, Mamma, I shall do nothing unless he
does.”
“You will have to give him up.”
“No, Mamma, not that; that is beyond what Papa
can demand of me. I shall not give him up, but I
certainly shall not marry him without Papa's consent,
or yours.”
“Nor see him?”
“Well; if he does not come I cannot see him.”

<#PG# 110>
107
“Nor correspond with him?”.
“Certainly not, if Papa forbids it.”
After that, Lady Elizabeth did give way to a con-
siderable extent. She did not tell her daughter that
she considered it at all probable that Sir Harry would
yield; but she made it to be understood that she her-
self would do so if Sir Harry would be persuaded.
And she acknowledged that the amount of obedience
promised by Emily was all that could be expected,
“But, Mamma,” said Emily, before she left her mother,
“do you not know that you love him yourself?”
“Love is such a strong word, my dear.”
“It is not half strong enough,” said Emily, press-
ing her two hands together. “But you do, Mamma?”
“I think he is very agreeable, certainly.”
“And handsome?-only that goes for nothing.”
“Yes, he is a fine-looking man."
“And clever? I don't know how it is; let there
be who there may in the room, he is always the best
talker."
“He knows how to talk, certainly."
“And, Mamma, don't you think that there is a
something, I don't know what,--something not at all
like other men about him that compels one to love
him? Oh, Mamma, do say something nice to me!
To me he is everything that a man should be.”,
“I wish he were, my dear.”
“As for the sort of life he has been leading, spend-

<#PG# 111>
108
ing more money than he ought, and all that kind of
thing, he has promised to reform it altogether; and he
is doing it now. At any rate, you must admit, Mamma,
that he is not false.”
“I hope not, my dear."
“Why do you speak in that way, Mamma? Does
he talk like a man that is false? Have you ever known
him to be false? Don't be prejudiced, Mamma, at
any rate.”
The reader will understand that when the daughter
had brought her mother as far as this, the elder lady
was compelled to say “something nice” at last. At
any rate there was a loving embrace between them,
and an understanding that the mother would not
exaggerate the difficulties of the position either by
speech or word.
“Of course you will have to see your papa to-
morrow morning,” Lady Elizabeth said.
“George will tell him everything to-night," said
Emily. She as she went to her bed did not doubt
but what the difficulties would melt. Luckily for her,
-o luckily !—it happened that her lover possessed
by his very birth a right which, beyond all other pos-
sessions, would recommend him to her father. And
then had not the man himself all natural good gifts
to recommend him? Of course he had not money or
property, but she had, or would have, property; and
of all men alive her father was the least disposed to

<#PG# 112>
109
be greedy. As she half thought of it and half dreamt
of it in her last waking moments of that important
day, she was almost altogether happy. It was so
sweet to know that she possessed the love of him
whom she loved better than all the world beside.
Cousin George did not have quite so good a time
of it that night. The first thing he did on his return
from Ulleswater to Humblethwaite was to write a
line to his friend Lady Altringham. This had been
promised, and he did so before he had seen Sir
Harry.
..-
“DEAR LADY A.--I have been successful with my
younger cousin. She is the bonniest, and the best,
and the brightest girl that ever lived, and I am the
happiest fellow. But I have not as yet seen the
Baronet. I am to do so to-night, and will report
progress to-morrow. I doubt I shan't find him so
bonny and so good and so bright. But, as you say,
the young birds ought to be too strong for the old
ones.-Yours most sincerely,
G. H.”
This was written while he was dressing, and was
put into the letter-box by himself as he came down-
stairs. It was presumed that the party had dined at
the Falls; but there was “a tea” prepared for them
on an extensive scale. Sir Harry, suspecting nothing,
was happy and almost jovial with Mr. Fitzpatrick and

<#PG# 113>
110
the two young ladies. Emily said hardly a word.
Lady Elizabeth, who had not as yet been told, but
already suspected something, was very anxious. George
was voluble, witty, and perhaps a little too loud. But
as the lad who was going to Oxford, and who had
drank a good deal of champagne and was now drink-
ing sherry, was loud also, George's manner was not
specially observed. It was past ten before they got
up from the table, and nearly eleven before George
was able to whisper a word to the Baronet. He al-
most shirked it for that night, and would have done
so had he not remembered how necessary it was that
Emily should know that his pluck was good. Of
course she would be asked to abandon him. Of
course she would be told that it was her duty to give
him up. Of course she would give him up unless he
could get such a hold upon her heart as to make her
doing so impossible to her. She would have to learn
that he was an unprincipled spendthrift,—nay worse
than that, as he hardly scrupled to tell himself. But
he need not weight his own character with the further
burden of cowardice. The Baronet could not eat
him, and he would not be afraid of the Baronet.
“Sir Harry," he whispered, “could you give me a
minute or two before we go to bed?” Sir Harry
started as though he had been stung, and looked his
cousin sharply in the face without answering him.
George kept his countenance, and smiled.

<#PG# 114>
111
III
“I won't keep you long,” he said.
“You had better come to my room,” said Sir
Harry, gruffly, and led the way into his own sanctum.
When there, he sat down in his accustomed armchair
without offering George a seat, but George soon found
a seat for himself. “And now what is it?” said Sir
Harry, with his blackest frown.
“I have asked my cousin to be my wife.”
“What! Emily?”
“Yes, Emily; and she has consented. I now ask
for your approval.” We must give Cousin George his
due, and acknowledge that he made his little request
exactly as he would have done had he been master of
ten thousand a year of his own, quite unencumbered.
“What right had you, sir, to speak to her without
coming to me first?”
“One always does, I think, go to the girl first,”
said George.
“You have disgraced yourself, sir, and outraged
my hospitality. You are no gentleman!”
“Sir Harry, that is strong language.”
“Strong! Of course it is strong. I mean it to be
strong. I shall make it stronger yet if you attempt to
say another word to her.”
“Look here, Sir Harry, I am bound to bear a good
deal from you, but I have a right to explain.”
“You have a right, sir, to go away from this, and
go away you shall."

<#PG# 115>
II2
“Sir Harry, you have told me that I am not a
gentleman.”
- “You have abused my kindness to you. What
right have you, who have not a shilling in the world,
to speak to my daughter? I won't have it, and let
that be an end of it. I won't have it. And I must
desire that you will leave Humblethwaite to-morrow.
I won't have it.”
“It is quite true that I have not a shilling."
“Then what business have you to speak to my
daughter?"
“Because I have that which is worth many shillings,
and which you value above all your property. I am
the heir to your name and title. When you are gone,
I must be the head of this family. I do not in the
least quarrel with you for choosing to leave your
property to your own child, but I have done the best
I could to keep the property and the title together.
I love my cousin.”
“I don't believe in your love, sir.”
“If that is all, I do not doubt but that I can
satisfy you.”
“It is not all; and it is not half all. And it isn't
because you are a pauper. You know it all as well
as I do, without my telling you, but you drive me to
tell you.”
“Know what, sir?"
“Though you hadn't a shilling, you should have

<#PG# 116>
113
had her if you could win her,—had your life been
even fairly decent. The title must go to you,-worse
luck for the family. You can talk well enough, and
what you say is true. I would wish that they should
go together.”
“Of course it will be better.”
“But, sir,—" then Sir Henry paused.
“Well, Sir Harry?”
“You oblige me to speak out. You are such a
one, that I do not dare to let you have my child.
Your life is so bad, that I should not be justified in
doing so for any family purpose. You would break
her heart.”
“You wrong me there, altogether.”
“You are a gambler.”
“I have been, Sir Harry.”
“And a spendthrift?”
“Well-yes; as long as I had little or nothing to
spend.”
“I believe you are over head and ears in debt
now, in spite of the assistance you have had from me
within twelve months."
Cousin George remembered the advice which had
been given him, that he should conceal nothing from
his cousin. “I do owe some money certainly,” he
said.
“And how do you mean to pay it?"
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 117>
114
“Well—if I marry Emily, I suppose that--you will
pay it."
“That's cool, at any rate.”
“What can I say, Sir Harry?”
“I would pay it all, though it were to half the
property—~"
“Less than a year's income would clear off every
shilling I owe, Sir Harry.”
“Listen to me, sir. Though it were ten years'
income, I would pay it all, if I thought that the rest
would be kept with the title, and that my girl would
be happy.”
“I will make her happy."
“But, sir, it is not only that you are a gambler
and spendthrift, and an unprincipled debtor without
even a thought of paying. You are worse than this.
There;—I am not going to call you names. I know
( what you are, and you shall not have my daughter.”
George Hotspur found himself compelled to think
for a few moments before he could answer a charge so
vague, and yet, as he knew, so well founded. Never-
theless he felt that he was progressing. His debts
would not stand in his way, if only he could make
this rich father believe that in other matters his
daughter would not be endangered by the marriage.
“I don't quite know what you mean, Sir Harry. I
am not going to defend myself. I have done much
of which I am ashamed. I was turned very young

<#PG# 118>
115
upon the world, and got to live with rich people
when I was myself poor. I ought to have withstood
the temptation, but I didn't, and I got into bad hands.
I don't deny it. There is a horrid Jew has bills of mine
now.”
“What have you done with that five thousand
pounds?"
“He had half of it; and I had to settle for the last
Leger, which went against me.”
“It is all gone?”
“Pretty nearly. I don't pretend but what I have
been very reckless as to money. I am ready to tell
you the truth about everything. I don't say that I
deserve her; but I do say this,--that I should not
have thought of winning her, in my position, had it
not been for the title. Having that in my favour, I
do not think that I was misbehaving to you in pro-
posing to her. If you will trust me now, I will be
as grateful and obedient a son as any man ever had.” ]
He had pleaded his cause well, and he knew it.
Sir Harry also felt that his cousin had made a better
case than he would have believed to be possible. He
was quite sure that the man was a scamp, utterly un-
trustworthy, and yet the man's pleading for himself
had been efficacious. He sat silent for full five minutes
before he spoke again, and then he gave judgment
as follows: “You will go away without seeing her to-
morrow.”

<#PG# 119>
116
“If you wish it."
“And you will not write to her.”
“Only a line.”
“Not a word,” said Sir Harry, imperiously.
“Only a line, which I will give open to you. You
can do with it as you please.”
"And as you have forced upon me the necessity,
I shall make inquiries in London as to your past life.
I have heard things which perhaps may be untrue.”
“What things, Sir Harry?”
“I shall not demean myself or injure you by re-
peating them, unless I find cause to believe they are
true. I do believe that the result will be such as to
make me feel that in justice to my girl I cannot allow
you to become her husband. I tell you so fairly.
Should the debts you owe be simple debts, not dis-
honourably contracted, I will pay them.”
“And then she shall be mine?”
“I will make no such promise. You had better
go now. You can have the carriage to Penrith as
early as you please in the morning; or to Carlisle if
you choose to go north. I will make your excuses to
Lady Elizabeth. Good night.”
Cousin George stood for a second in doubt, and
then shook hands with the Baronet. He reached
Penrith the next morning soon after ten, and break-
fasted alone at the hotel.
There were but very few words spoken on the

<#PG# 120>
117
-
occasion between the father and daughter, but Emily
did succeed in learning pretty nearly the truth of
what had taken place. On the Monday her mother
gave her the following note :-
“DEAREST,- At your father's bidding, I have gone
suddenly. You will understand why I have done so.
I shall try to do just as he would have me; but you
will, I know, be quite sure that I should never give
you up.-Yours for ever and ever,
G. H.”
The father had thought much of it, and at last had
determined that Emily should have the letter.
In the course of the week there came other guests to
Humblethwaite, and it so chanced that there was a
lady who knew the Altringhams, who had unfortunately
met the Altringhams at Goodwood, and who, most
unfortunately, stated in Emily's hearing that she had
seen George Hotspur at Goodwood.
"He was not there,” said Emily, quite boldly.
“Oh, yes; with the Altringhams, as usual. He is
always with them at Goodwood.”
“He was not at the last meeting,” said Emily,
smiling.
The lady said nothing till her lord was present,
and then appealed to him. “Frank, didn't you see
George Hotspur with the Altringhams at Goodwood,
last July?”

<#PG# 121>
118
“To be sure I did, and lost a pony to him on
Eros.”
The lady looked at Emily, who said nothing
further; but she was still quite convinced that George
Hotspur had not been at those Goodwood races.
It is so hard, when you have used a lie commodi-
ously, to bury it, and get well rid of it.
c

<#PG# 122>
119
CHAPTER X.
Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber.
WHEN George Hotspur left Humblethwaite, turned
out of the house by the angry Baronet early in the
morning, -as the reader will remember,—he was at
his own desire driven to Penrith, choosing to go south
rather than north. He had doubted for a while as to
his immediate destination. The Altringhams were
still at Castle Corry, and he might have received great
comfort from her ladyship's advice and encourage-
ment. But, intimate as he was with the Altringhams,
he did not dare to take a liberty with the Earl. A
certain allowance of splendid hospitality at Castle
Corry was at his disposal every year, and Lord
Altringham always welcomed him with thorough kind-
ness. But George Hotspur had in some fashion been
made to understand that he was not to overstay his
time; and he was quite aware that the Earl could be very
disagreeable upon occasions. There was a something
in the Earl of which George was afraid; and, to tell
the truth, he did not dare to go back to Castle Corry.
And then, might it not be well for him to make im-
mediate preparation in London for those inquiries
respecting his debts and his character which Sir Harry

<#PG# 123>
I 20
had decided to make? It would be very difficult for
him to make any preparation that could lead to a good
result; but if no preparation were made, the result
would be very bad indeed. It might perhaps be pos-
sible to do something with Mr. Hart and Captain
Stubber. He had no other immediate engagements.
In October he was due to shoot pheasants with a
distinguished party in Norfolk, but this business which
he had now in hand was of so much importance that
even the pheasant-shooting and the distinguished party
were not of much moment to him.
He went to Penrith, and thence direct to London.
It was the habit of his life to give up his London
lodgings when he left town at the end of the season,
and spare himself the expense of any home as long
as he could find friends to entertain him. There are
certain items of the cost of living for which the
greatest proficient in the art of tick must pay, or he
will come to a speedy end;-and a man's lodging is
one of them. If indeed the spendthrift adapts himself
to the splendour of housekeeping, he may, provided
his knowledge of his business be complete, and his
courage adequate, house himself gloriously for a year
or two with very small payment in ready money. He
may even buy a mansion with an incredibly small out-
lay, and, when once in it, will not easily allow him-
self to be extruded. George Hotspur, however, not
from any want of knowledge or of audacity, but from

<#PG# 124>
I 21
the nature of the life he chose to lead, had abstained
from such investment of his credit, and had paid for
his lodgings in St. James' Street. He was consequently
houseless at the moment, and on his arrival in London
took himself to an hotel close behind the military club
to which he belonged.
At this moment he was comparatively a rich man.
He had between three and four hundred pounds at a
bank at which he kept an account when possessed of
funds. But demands upon him were very pressing,
and there was a certain Captain Stubber who was
bitter against him, almost to blood, because one Mr.
Abraham Hart had received two thousand pounds
from the proceeds of Sir Harry's generosity. Captain
Stubber had not received a shilling, and had already
threatened Cousin George with absolute exposure if
something were not done to satisfy him,
George, when he had ordered his dinner at his
club, wrote the following letter to Lady Altringham.
He had intended to write from Penrith in the morning,
but when there had been out of sorts and unhappy,
and had disliked to confess, after his note of triumph
sounded on the previous evening, that he had been
turned out of Humblethwaite. He had got over that
feeling during the day, with the help of sundry glasses
of sherry and a little mixed curaçoa and brandy which
he took immediately on his arrival in London,-and,

<#PG# 125>
122
so supported, made a clean breast of it, as the reader
shall see.
“DEAR LADY A.,” he said,—“Here I am, back in
town, banished from heaven. My darling, gentle,
future papa-in-law gave me to understand, when I
told him the extent of my hopes last night, that the
outside of the park-gates at Humblethwaite was the
place for me; nevertheless he sent me to Penrith with
the family horses, and, taking it as a whole, I think
that my interview with him, although very disagreeable,
was not unsatisfactory. I told him everything that I
could tell him. He was kind enough to call me a
blackguard (!!!) because I had gone to Emily without
speaking to him first. On such occasions, however, a
man takes anything. I ventured to suggest that what
I had done was not unprecedented among young
people, and hinted that while he could make me the
future master of Humblethwaite, I could make my
cousin the future Lady Hotspur; and that in no other
way could Humblethwaite and the Hotspurs be kept
together. It was wonderful how he cooled down after
a while, saying that he would pay all my debts if he
found them-satisfactory. I can only say that I never
found them so.
“It ended in this, that he is to make inquiry
about me, and that I am to have my cousin unless
I am found out to be very bad indeed. How or when

<#PG# 126>
123
the inquiries will be made I do not know; but I am
here to prepare for them.
“Yours always most faithfully,
“G. H.”
"I do not like to ask Altringham to do anything
for me. No man ever had a kinder friend than I
have had in him, and I know he objects to meddle in
the money matters of other people. But if he could
lend me his name for a thousand pounds till I can
get these things settled, I believe I could get over
every other difficulty. I should as a matter of course
include the amount in the list of debts which I should
give to Sir Harry; but the sum at once, which I could
raise on his name without trouble to him, would enable
me to satisfy the only creditor who will be likely to
do me real harm with Sir Harry. I think you will
understand all this, and will perceive how very material
the kindness to me may be; but if you think that
Altringham will be unwilling to do it, you had better
not show him this letter.”
It was the mixed curaçoa and brandy which gave
George Hotspur the courage to make the request
contained in his postscript. He had not intended to
make it when he sat down to write, but as he wrote
the idea had struck him that if ever a man ought to
use a friend this was an occasion for doing so. If he

<#PG# 127>
124
could get a thousand pounds from Lord Altringham,
he might be able to stop Captain Stubber's mouth.
He did not believe that he should be successful, and
he thought it probable that Lord Altringham might
express vehement displeasure. But the game was
worth the candle, and then he knew that he could
trust the Countess.
London was very empty, and he passed a wretched
evening at his club. There were not men enough to
make up a pool, and he was obliged to content him-
self with a game of billiards with an old half-pay
naval captain, who never left London, and who would
bet nothing beyond a shilling on the game. The half-
pay navy captain won four games, thereby paying
for his dinner, and then Cousin George went sulkily
to bed.
He had come up to town expressly to see Captain
Stubber and Mr. Hart, and perhaps also to see another
friend from whom some advice might be had; but on
the following morning he found himself very averse to
seeking any of these advisers. He had applied to
Lady Altringham for assistance, and he told himself
that it would be wise to wait for her answer. And
yet he knew that it would not be wise to wait, as Sir
Harry would certainly be quick in making his promised
inquiries. For four days, he hung about between his
hotel and his club, and then he got Lady Altringham's

<#PG# 128>
125
answer. We need only quote the passage which had
reference to George's special request:-
“Gustavus says that he will have nothing to do
with money. You know his feelings about it. And he
says that it would do no good. Whatever the debts
are, tell them plainly to Sir Harry. If this be some
affair of play, as Gustavus supposes, tell that to Sir
Harry. Gustavus thinks that the Baronet would with-
out doubt pay any such debt which could be settled or
partly settled by a thousand pounds."
“D- d heartless, selfish fellow! quite incapable
of anything like true friendship,” said Cousin George
to himself, when he read Lady Altringham's letter.
Now he must do something. Hitherto neither
Stubber, nor Hart, nor the other friend knew of his
presence in London. Hart, though a Jew, was much
less distasteful to him than Captain Stubber, and to
Mr. Abraham Hart he went first.
Mr. Abraham Hart was an attorney,—so called hy
himself and friends,- living in a genteel street abutting
on Gray's Inn Road, with whose residence and place
of business, all beneath the same roof, George Hotspur
was very well acquainted. Mr. Hart was a man in the
prime of life, with black hair and a black beard, and
a new shining hat, and a coat with a velvet collar and
silk lining. He was always dressed in the same way,
and had never yet been seen by Cousin George with-
out his hat on his head. He was a pleasant-spoken,

<#PG# 129>
126
very ignorant, smiling, jocose man, with a slightly
Jewish accent, who knew his business well, pursued it
diligently, and considered himself to have a clear con-
science. He had certain limits of forbearance with
his customers — limits which were not narrow; but,
when those were passed, he would sell the bed from
under a dying woman with her babe, or bread from
the mouth of a starving child. To do so was the
necessity of his trade,- for his own guidance in which
he had made laws. The breaking of those laws by
himself would bring his trade to an end, and there-
fore he declined to break them.
Mr. Hart was a man who attended to his business,
and he was found at home even in September. “Yes
Mr. 'Oshspur, it's about time something was done now;
ain't it?” said Mr. Hart, smiling pleasantly.
Cousin George, also smiling, reminded his friend
of the two thousand pounds paid to him only a few
months since. “Not a shilling was mine of that,
Captain 'Oshspur, not a brass fardin'. That was
quite neshesshary just then, as you know, Captain
'Oshspur, or the fat must have been in the fire. And
what's up now?”
Not without considerable difficulty Cousin George
explained to the Jew gentleman what was “up." He
probably assumed more inclination on the part of Sir
Harry for the match than he was justified in doing;
but was very urgent in explaining to Mr. Hart that

<#PG# 130>
127
when inquiry was made on the part of Sir Harry as to
the nature of the debt, the naked truth should not be
exactly told.
"It was very bad, vasn't it, Captain 'Oshspur, having
to divide with that fellow Stubber the money from the
’Orse Guards? You vas too clever for both of us there,
Mr. 'Oshspur; veren't you now, Captain ’Oshspur?
And I've two cheques still on my 'ands which is
marked "No account!' 'No account is very bad.
Isn't ‘No account' very bad on a cheque, Captain
'Oshspur? And then I've that cheque on Drummond,
signed;—God knows how that is signed! There ain't
no such person at all. Baldebeque! That's more like
it than nothing else. When you brought me that, I
thought there vas a Lord Baldebeque; and I know you
live among lords, Captain ’Oshspur.”
“On my honour I brought it you,-just as I took
it at Tattersall's.”
“There was an expert as I showed it to says it is
your handwriting, Captain ’Oshspur."
“He lies!” said Cousin George, fiercely.
“But when Stubber would have half the sale
money, for the commission—and wanted it all too!
lord, how he did curse and swear! That was bad,
Captain 'Oshspur.”
Then Cousin George swallowed his fierceness for
a time, ind proceeded to explain to Mr. Hart that
Sir Harry would certainly pay all his debts if only

<#PG# 131>
128
those little details could be kept back to which Mr.
Hart had so pathetically alluded. Above all it would
be necessary to preserve in obscurity that little mistake
which had been made as to the pawning of the com-
mission. Cousin George told a great many lies, but
he told also much that was true. The Jew did not
believe one of the lies; but then, neither did he believe
much of the truth. When George had finished his
story, then Mr. Hart had a story of his own to tell.
“To let you know all about it, Captain 'Oshspur,
the old gent has begun about it already."
“What, Sir Harry?”
“Yes, Sir ’Arry. Mr. Boltby—~"
“He's the family lawyer.”
“I suppose so, Captain ’Oshspur. Vell, he vas here
yesterday, and vas very polite. If I'd just tell him all
about everything, he thought as 'ow the Baronet would
settle the affair off 'and. He vas very generous in his
offer, vas Mr. Boltby; but he didn't say nothin' of any
marriage, Captain 'Oshspur.”
“Of course he didn't. You are not such a fool as
to suppose he would.”
“No; I ain't such a fool as I looks, Captain ’Oshspur,
am I? I didn't think it likely, seeing vat vas the
nature of his interrogatories. Mr. Boltby seemed to
know a good deal. It is astonishing how much them
fellows do know."
“You didn't tell him anything?"

<#PG# 132>
129
“Not much, Captain 'Oshspur-not at fust starting.
I'm a going to have my money, you know, Captain
'Oshspur. And if I see my vay to my money one vay,
and if I don't see no vay the other vay, vy, vhat's a
man to do? You can't blame me, Captain 'Oshspur.
I've been very indulgent with you; I have, Captain
'Oshspur."
Cousin George promised, threatened, explained,
swore by all his gods, and ended by assuring Mr.
Abraham Hart that his life and death were in that
gentleman's keeping. If Mr. Hart would only not
betray him, the money would be safe and the marriage
would be safe, and everything would easily come right.
Over and above other things, Cousin George would
owe to Mr. Abraham Hart a debt of gratitude which
never would be wholly paid. Mr. Hart could only say
that he meant to have his money, but that he did not
mean to be "ungenteel.” Much in his opinion must
depend on what Stubber would do. As for Stubber,
he couldn't speak to Stubber himself, as he and Stubber
“were two.” As for himself, if he could get his money
he certainly would not be “ungenteel.” And he
meant what he said-meant more than he said. He
would still run some risk rather than split on an old
customer such as “Captain 'Oshspur.” But now that
a sudden way to his money was opened to him, he
could not undertake to lose sight of it.
With a very neavy heart Cousin George went from
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 133>
130
Mr. Hart's house to the house of call of Captain
Stubber. Mr. Boltby had been before him with Hart,
and he augured the worst from Sir Harry's activity in
the matter. If Mr. Boltby had already seen the Cap-
tain, all his labour would probably be too late. Where
Captain Stubber lived, even so old a friend of his as
Cousin George did not know. And in what way Cap-
tain Stubber had become a captain, George, though
he had been a military man himself, had never learned.
But Captain Stubber had a house. of call in a very
narrow, dirty little street near Red Lion Square. It
was close to a public-house, but did not belong to the
public-house. George Hotspur, who had been very
often to the place of call, had never seen there any
appurtenances of the Captain's business. There were
no account-books, no writing-table, no ink even, ex-
cept that contained in a little box with a screw, which
Captain Stubber would take out of his own pocket.
Mr. Hart was so far established and civilized as to
keep a boy whom he called a clerk; but Captain
Stubber seemed to keep nothing. A dirty little girl at
the house of call would run and fetch Captain Stubber,
if he were within reach; but most usually an appoint-
ment had to be made with the Captain. Cousin
George well remembered the day when his brother
Captain first made his acquaintance. About two years
after the commencement of his life in London, Captain
Stubber had had an interview with him in the little

<#PG# 134>
131
waiting-room just within the club doors. Captain
Stubber then had in his possession a trumpery note
of hand with George's signature, which, as he stated,
he had “done” for a small tradesman with whom
George had been fool enough to deal for cigars.
From that day to the present he and Captain Stubber
had been upon most intimate and confidential terms.
If there was any one in the world whom Cousin George
really hated, it was Captain Stubber.
On this occasion Captain Stubber was forthcoming
after a delay of about a quarter of an hour. During
that time Cousin George had stood in the filthy little
parlour of the house of call in a frame of mind which
was certainly not to be envied. Had Mr. Boltby also
been with Captain Stubber? He knew his two
creditors well enough to understand that the Jew, get-
ting his money, would be better pleased to serve him
than to injure him. But the Captain would from
choice do him an ill turn. Nothing but self-interest
would tie up Captain Stubber's tongue. Captain
Stubber was a tall thin gentleman, probably over sixty
years of age, with very seedy clothes, and a red nose.
He always had Berlin gloves, very much torn about
the fingers, carried a cotton umbrella, wore-as his
sole mark of respectability-a very stiff, clean, white
collar round his neck, and invariably smelt of gin.
No one knew where he lived, or how he carried on
his business; but, such as he was, he had dealings

<#PG# 135>
132
with large sums of money, or at least with bills pro-
fessing to stand for large sums, and could never have
been found without a case in his pocket crammed with
these documents. The quarter of an hour seemed to
George to be an age; but at last Captain Stubber
knocked at the front door and was shown into the
room.
“How d'ye do, Captain Stubber?” said George.
“I'd do a deal better, Captain Hotspur, if I found
it easier sometimes to come by my own.”
“Well, yes; but no doubt you have your profit in
the delay, Captain Stubber.”
“It's nothing to you, Captain Hotspur, whether I
have profit or loss. All you 'as got to look to is to
pay me what you owe me. And I intend that you
shall, or by G~- you shall suffer for it! I'm not
going to stand it any longer. I know where to have
you, and have you I will.”
Cousin George was not quite sure whether the
Captain did know where to have him. If Mr. Boltby
had been with him, it might be so; but then Captain
Stubber was not a man so easily found as Mr. Hart,
and the connection between himself and the Captain
might possibly have escaped Mr. Boltby's inquiries.
It was very difficult to tell the story of his love to
such a man as Captain Stubber, but he did tell it.
He explained all the difficulties of Sir Harry's position
in regard to the title and the property, and he was

<#PG# 136>
133
diffuse upon his own advantages as head of the family,
and of the need there was that he should marry the
heiress.
“But there is not an acre of it will come to you
unless he gives it you?" inquired Captain Stubber.
“Certainly not,” said Cousin George, anxious that
the Captain should understand the real facts of the
case to a certain extent.
“And he needn't give you the girl?”
“The girl will give herself, my friend.”
“And he needn't give the girl the property?"
“But he will. She is his only child.”
“I don't believe a word about it. I don't believe
such a one as Sir Harry Hotspur would lift his hand
to help such as you.”
“He has offered to pay my debts already.”
“Very well. Let him make the offer to me. Look
here, Captain Hotspur, I am not a bit afraid of you,
you know."
“Who asks you to be afraid?".
“Of all the liars I ever met with, you are the
worst.”
George Hotspur smiled, looking up at the red nose
of the malignant old man as though it were a joke;
but that which he had to hear at this moment was a
heavy burden. Captain Stubber probably understood
this, for he repeated his words.
. “I never knew any liar nigh so bad as you. And

<#PG# 137>
134
then there is such a deal worse than lies. I believe
I could send you to penal servitude, Captain Hotspur.”
“You could do no such thing,” said Cousin George,
still trying to look as though it were a joke, “and you
don't think you could.”
“I'll do my best at any rate, if I don't have my
money soon. You could pay Mr. Hart two thousand
pounds, but you think I'm nobody.”
“I am making arrangements now for having every
shilling paid to you.”
“Yes, I see. I've known a good deal about your
arrangements. Look here, Captain Hotspur, unless
I have five hundred pounds on or before Saturday,
I'll write to Sir Harry Hotspur, and I'll give him a
statement of all our dealings. You can trust me,
though I can't trust you. Good morning, Captain
Hotspur.”
Captain Stubber did believe in his heart that he
was a man much injured by Cousin George, and that
Cousin George was one whom he was entitled to
despise. And yet a poor wretch more despicable,
more dishonest, more false, more wicked, or more
cruel than Captain Stubber could not have been found
in all London. His business was carried on with a
small capital borrowed from a firm of low attorneys,
who were the real holders of the bills he carried, and
the profits which they allowed him te make were very
trifling. But from Cousin George during the last

<#PG# 138>
135
-
----
twelve months he had made no profit at all. And
Cousin George in former days had trodden upon him
as on a worm.
Cousin George did not fail to perceive that Mr.
Boltby had not as yet applied to Captain Stubber.
--
--

<#PG# 139>
136
CHAPTER X I.
Mrs. Morton.
FIVE HUNDRED POUNDS before Saturday, and this
was Tuesday! As Cousin George was taken westward
from Red Lion Square in a cab, three or four different
lines of conduct suggested themselves to him. In
the first place, it would be a very good thing to murder
Captain Stubber. In the present effeminate state of
civilization and with the existing scruples as to the
value of human life, he did not see his way clearly in
this direction, but entertained the project rather as a
beautiful castle in the air. The two next suggestions
were to pay him the money demanded, or to pay him
half of it. The second suggestion was the simpler, as
the state of Cousin George's funds made it feasible;
but then that brute would probably refuse to take the
half in lieu of the whole when he found that his de-
mand had absolutely produced a tender of ready cash.
As for paying the whole, it might perhaps be done.
It was still possible that, with such prospects before
him as those he now possessed, he could raise a
hundred or hundred and fifty pounds; but then he
would be left penniless. The last course of action
which he contemplated was, to take no further notice

<#PG# 140>
137
of Captain Stubber, and let him tell his story to Sir
Harry if he chose to tell it. The man was such a
blackguard that his entire story would probably not be
believed; and then was it not almost necessary that
Sir Harry should hear it? Of course there would be
anger, and reproaches, and threats, and difficulty.
But if Emily would be true to him, they might all by
degrees be levelled down. This latter line of conduct
would be practicable, and had this beautiful attraction,
--that it would save for his own present use that
charming balance of ready money which he still pos-
sessed. Had Altringham possessed any true backbone
of friendship, he might now, he thought, have been
triumphant over all his difficulties.
When he sat down to his solitary dinner at his
club, he was very tired with his day's work. Attend-
ing to the affairs of such gentlemen as Mr. Hart and
Captain Stubber,—who well know how to be masterful
when their time for being masterful has come,-is
fatiguing enough. But he had another task to per-
form before he went to bed, which he would fain have
kept unperformed were it possible to do so. He had
written to a third friend to make an appointment for
the evening, and this appointment he was bound to
keep. He would very much rather have stayed at his
club and played billiards with the navy captain, even
though he might again have lost his shillings. The
third friend was that Mrs. Morton to whom Lord

<#PG# 141>
138
Altringham had once alluded. “I supposed that it
was coming,” said Mrs. Morton, when she had listened,
without letting a word fall from her own lips, to the
long rambling story which Cousin George told her,-
a rambling story in which there were many lies, but
in which there was the essential truth, that Cousin
George intended, if other things could be made to fit,
to marry his cousin Emily Hotspur. Mrs. Morton was
a woman who had been handsome,--dark, thin, with
great brown eyes and thin lips and a long well-formed
nose; she was in truth three years younger than
George Hotspur, but she looked to be older. She was
a clever woman and well read too, and in every
respect superior to the man whom she had con-
descended to love. She earned her bread by her pro-
fession as an actress, and had done so since her
earliest years. What story there may be of a Mr.
Morton who had years ago married, and ill-used, and
deserted her, need not here be told. Her strongest
passion at this moment was love for the cold-blooded
reprobate who had now come to tell her of his in-
tended marriage. She had indeed loved George
Hotspur, and George had been sufficiently attached to
her to condescend to take aid from her earnings.
“I supposed that it was coming,” she said in a low
voice when he brought to an end the rambling story
which she had allowed him to tell without a word of
interruption.

<#PG# 142>
139
“What is a fellow to do?" said George.
“Is she handsome?”
George thought that he might mitigate the pain by
making little of his cousin. “Well, no, not particularly.
She looks like a lady.”
“And I suppose I don't.” For a moment there
was a virulence in this which made poor George almost
gasp. This woman was patient to a marvel, long-
bearing, affectionate, imbued with that conviction so
common to woman and the cause of so much delight
to men,--that ill-usage and suffering are intended for
woman; but George knew that she could turn upon
him if goaded far enough, and rend him. He could
depend upon her for very much, because she loved
him; but he was afraid of her. “You didn't mean
that, I know,” she added, smiling.
“Of course I didn't.”
“No; your cruelties don't lie in that line; do they,
George?”
“I'm sure I never mean to be cruel to you, Lucy."
“I don't think you do. I hardly believe that you
ever mean anything, except just to get along and
live.”
“A fellow must live, you know,” said George.
In ordinary society George Hotspur could be bright,
and he was proud of being bright. With this woman
he was always subdued, always made to play second
fiddle, always talked like a boy; and he knew it. He

<#PG# 143>
70
ad loved her once, if he was capable of loving any-
ning; but her mastery over him wearied him, even
hough he was, after a fashion, proud of her cleverness,
nd he wished that she were,—-well, dead, if the
eader choose that mode of expressing what probably
ere George's wishes. But he had never told himself
mat he desired her death. He could build pleasant
astles in the air as to the murder of Captain Stubber,
ut his thoughts did not travel that way in reference
Mrs. Morton.
“She is not pretty, then, this rich bride of
ours?”
“Not particularly; she's well enough, you know.”
“And well enough is good enough for you;--is it?
Do you love her, George?”.
The woman's voice was very low and plaintive as
he asked the question. Though from moment to
noment she could use her little skill in pricking him
rith her satire, still she loved him; and she would
ary her tone, and as at one minute she would make
im uneasy by her raillery, so at the next she would
uell him by her tenderness. She looked into his face
or a reply, when he hesitated. “Tell me that you do
lot love her,” she said, passionately.
“Not particularly,” replied George.
“And yet you would marry her?”.
“What's a fellow to do? You see how I am fixed
about the title.
a man situated as
"Royal oblig
"By George,
the satire. Fron
sharp enough to
thing go to the
long! And then
without an incom
“You have d
“I know tha
and I know also
"Don't talk <
a time as this ye
Then she rose f
carried on by th
here, George; i
money, by the 1
self. To buy m
a man."
"I didn't m
debts.”
“And will I
her money? W
he loves you?"
"It is all a
understand.”
"Of course

<#PG# 144>
: of loving any-
ried him, even
of her cleverness,
1, dead, if the
$ what probably
ver told himself
1 build pleasant
Captain Stubber,
vay in reference
rich bride of
-h, you know.”
for you;—is it?
about the title. These are kinds of things to w
a man situated as I am is obliged to submit.”
“Royal obligations, as one might call them.”
“By George, yes,” said George, altogether miss
the satire. From any other lips he would have b
sharp enough to catch it. “One can't see the wh
thing go to the dogs after it has kept its head up
long! And then you know, a man can't live altoget
without an income.”
“You have done so, pretty well.”
“I know that I owe you a lot of money, Lu.
and I know also that I mean to pay you."
“Don't talk about that. I don't know how at su
, a time as this you can bring yourself to mention i
Then she rose from her seat and flashed into wra
carried on by the spirit of her own words. “Lo
here, George; if you send me any of that womai
money, by the living God I will send it back to hi
self. To buy me with her money! But it is so li
a man."
"I didn't mean that. Sir Harry is to pay all 1
debts.”
“And will not that be the same? Will it not
her money? Why is he to pay your debts? Becau
he loves you?”
“It is all a family arrangement. You don't qui
understand.”
“Of course I don't understand. Such a one as
und plaintive as
om moment to
In pricking him
and she would
he would make
next she would
ed into his face
me that you do
Low I am fixed

<#PG# 145>
OF
none. “They mea
DOW."
-nnot lift myself so high above the earth. Great
milies form a sort of heaven of their own, which
por broken, ill-conditioned, wretched, common crea-
res such as I am cannot hope to comprehend. But,
- heaven, what a lot of the vilest clay goes to the
aking of that garden of Eden! Look here, George;
-you have nothing of your own?”
“Not much, indeed.”
“Nothing. Is not that so? You can answer me at
“Morton is dea
"Yes; he died
“I couldn't hay
"Don't be a fc
made? Don't pre
be disgusting on
nothing to you wh
to be?”
“When is what
ay rate.”
“You know all about it,” he said, -truly enough,
r she did know.
“And you cannot earn a penny."
"I don't know that I can. I never was very good
carning anything.”
“It isn't gentlemanlike, is it? But I can earn
oney.”
“By George! yes. I've often envied you. I have
deed.”
“How flattering! As far as it went you should
ive had it all,-nearly all, --if you could have been
ue to me."
"But, Lucy,--about the family?"
“And about your debts? Of course I couldn't pay
ebts which were always increasing. And of course
our promises for the future were false. We both
new that they were false when they were made. Did
e not?” She paused for an answer, but he made
“Your marriag
who has got money
to love."
It struck even
Emily Hotspur sho
acknowledged to !
of the finest girls
don; and, as for
might be fond of
and why shouldn
loved his cousin.
were difficult, and
all this,
"When is it t
imperiously.
In answer to
there was still a

<#PG# 146>
none. “They meant nothing; did they? He is de
now."
earth. Great
ir own, which
common crea-
prehend. But,
Ly goes to the
here, George;
| answer me at
-truly enough,
was very good
“Morton is dead?”
“Yes; he died in San Francisco, months ago.”
“I couldn't have known that, Lucy; could I?”
“Don't be a fool! What difference would it ha
made? Don't pretend anything so false. It wou
be disgusting on the very face of it. It mattere
nothing to you whether he lived or died. When is
to be?”
“When is what to be?” .
“Your marriage with this ill-looking young woman
who has got money, but whom you do not even preten
to love."
It struck even George that this was a way in whic
Emily Hotspur should not be described. She had bee:
acknowledged to be the beauty of the last season, on
of the finest girls that had ever been seen about Lon
don; and, as for loving her,-he did love her. A mai
might be fond of two dogs, or have two pet horses
and why shouldn't he love two women! Of course hi
loved his cousin. But his circumstances at the momen
were difficult, and he didn't quite know how to explair
all this,
“When is it to be?” she said, urging her questior
imperiously.
. In answer to this he gave her to understand that
there was still a good deal of difficulty. He told her
at I can earn
- you. I have
t you should
uld have been
couldn't pay
nd of course
2. We both
- made. Did
but he made

<#PG# 147>
44
omething of his position with Captain Stubber, and
lefined, -not with absolute correctness,-the amount
of consent which Sir Harry had given to the mar-
iage.
“And what am I to do?" she asked.
He looked blankly into her face. She then rose
gain, and unlocking a desk with a key that hung at
ier girdle, she took from it a bundle of papers.
“There,” she said; "there is the letter in which I
jave your promise to marry me when I am free;—as
am now. It could not be less injurious to you than
vhen locked up there; but the remembrance of it
night frighten you.” She threw the letter to him
cross the table, but he did not touch it. “And here
re others which might be taken to mean the same
hing. There! I am not so injured as I might seem
o be,—for I never believed them. How could I be-
ieve anything that you would say to me,-anything
hat you would write?”
“Don't be down on me too hard, Lucy.”
“No, I will not be down upon you at all. If these
hings pained you, I would not say them. Shall I
lestroy the letters?" Then she took them, one after
.nother, and tore them into small fragments. “You
vill be easier now, I know.”
“Easy! I am not very easy, I can tell you."
“Captain Stubber will not let you off so gently as
. do. Is that it?”
Then there
pecuniary arrange
at all the undert
wonderful faith
€250 towards t
Stubber; and this
she would consei
Harry's money.
said; but she did
be forthcoming
George Hotspur á
in his thanks. A
weakness was alm
"You will con
his hand. Again
you will come and
"Oh, of cours
“A great dea
borne; but do no
she did, and have
you better than e
come?"
He promised h
her.
On the Saturda
temporarily happy
five hundred poun
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 148>
ain Stubber, and
ess,—the amount
ven to the mar-
ed.
She then rose
Key that hung at
of papers.
letter in which I
n I am free;—as
ious to you than
membrance of it
ne letter to him
h it. “And here
mean the same
as I might seem
How could I be-
o me, anything
Then there was made between them a cert
pecuniary arrangement, which if Mrs. Morton trus
at all the undertaking made to her, showed a m
wonderful faith on her part. She would lend h
£250 towards the present satisfaction of Capta
Stubber; and this sum, to be lent for such a purpo.
she would consent to receive back again out of :
Harry's money. She must see à certain manager, s.
said; but she did not doubt but that her loan wou
be forthcoming on the Saturday morning. Capta
George Hotspur accepted the offer, and was profu:
in his thanks. After that, when he was going, h
weakness was almost equal to his vileness.
“You will come and see me,” she said, as she hel
his hand. Again he paused a moment. “George
you will come and see me?"
“Oh, of course I will."
“A great deal I can bear; a great deal I hav
borne; but do not be a coward. I knew you before
she did, and have loved you better, and have treated
you better than ever she will do. Of course you wil
Lucy."
at all. If these
come?"
them. Shall I
them, one after
gments. “You
: He promised her that he would, and then went from
her.
On the Saturday morning Captain Stubber was made
temporarily happy by the most unexpected receipt of
five hundred pounds.
tell you."
off so gently as
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 149>
46
CHAPTER XII.
week, and then |
certainly himself
October.
In the meai
various other tro
sore. There car
with whom his ac
mas follows:
The Hunt becomes hot.
“Dear Hots
Goodwood meetii
me the question.
that I did; that )
Yours ever,
SEPTEMBER passed away with Captain Hotspur very
inpleasantly. He had various interviews with Captain
Stubber, with Mr. Hart, and with other creditors, and
Cound very little amusement. Lady Altringham had
vritten to him again, advising him strongly to make
out a complete list of his debts, and to send them
poldly to Sir Harry. He endeavoured to make out
he list, but had hardly the audacity to do it even for
his own information. When the end of September
ad come, and he was preparing himself to join the
party of distinguished pheasant-shooters in Norfolk, he
iad as yet sent no list to Sir Harry, nor had he heard
Į word from Humblethwaite. Certain indications had
eached him,—continued to reach him from day to
lay--that Mr. Boltby was at work, but no communica-
ion had been made actually to himself even by Mr.
Zoltby. When and how and in what form he was
expected to send the schedule of his debts to Sir Harry
je did not know; and thus it came to pass that when
he time came for his departure from town, he had
ient no such schedule at all. His sojourn, however,
with the distinguished party was to last only for a
He understood
had been at Hum
the man to write
getting him into t
but, nevertheless
there was another
ning low in funds
he feared was a
Stubber's immedia
was, that at the
tember he found
sovereigns in his
ably reduced befor

<#PG# 150>
week, and then he would really go to work. He wo
certainly himself write to Sir Harry before the end
October.
In the meantime there came other troubles,
various other troubles. One other trouble vexed h.
sore. There came to him a note from a gentlem.
with whom his acquaintance was familiar though sligh
as follows:
ain Hotspur very
ews with Captain
er creditors, and
Altringham had
-trongly to make
ad to send them
ed to make out
to do it even for
id of September
mself to join the
rs in Norfolk, he
or had he heard
indications had
im from day to
“DEAR HOTSPUR,--Did I not meet you at the la
Goodwood meeting? If you don't mind, pray answ
me the question. You will remember, I do not doub
that I did; that I lost my money too, and paid it.-
Yours ever,
“F. STACKPOOLE.”
: 10 communica-
elf even by Mr.
at form he was
:bts to Sir Harry
He understood it all immediately. The Stackpoole
had been at Humblethwaite. But what business hac
the man to write letters to him with the object o
getting him into trouble? He did not answer the note
but, nevertheless, it annoyed him much. And ther.
there was another great vexation. He was now run-
ning low in funds for present use. He had made what
he feared was a most useless outlay in satisfying
Stubber's immediate greed for money, and the effect
was, that at the beginning of the last week in Sep-
tember he found himself with hardly more than fifty
sovereigns in his possession, which would be consider-
ably reduced before he could leave town. He had been
10*
pass that when
town, he had
ourni, however,
ast only for a

<#PG# 151>
148
added a postscrip
will be over for n
and the house of
be kept together.
My cousin is a
shall lose ten tii
thought, that the
eighty pounds ti
know that he was
a year! But the n
to say that he di
at all, and that he
worse off before,—very much worse; but it was especially
incumbent on him now to keep up that look of high
feather which cannot be maintained in its proper bright-
ness without ready cash. He must take a man-servant
with him among the distinguished guests; he must fee
game-keepers, pay railway fares, and have loose cash
about him for a hundred purposes. He wished it to
be known that he was going to marry his cousin. He ·
might find some friend with softer heart than Altring-
ham, who would lend him a few hundreds on being
made to believe in this brilliant destiny; but a roll of
bank-notes in his pocket would greatly aid him in
making the destiny credible. Fifty pounds, as he well
knew, would melt away from him like snow. The last
fifty pounds of a thousand always goes quicker than
any of the nineteen other fifties.
Circumstances had made it impossible for him to
attend the Leger this year, but he had put a little
money on it. The result had done nothing for or
against him,-except this, that whereas he received
between one and two hundred pounds, he conceived
the idea of paying only a portion of what he had lost.
With reference to the remainder, he wrote to ask his
friend if it would be quite the same if the money were
paid at Christmas. If not, of course it should be sent
at once. The friend was one of the Altringham set,
who had been at Castle Corry, and who had heard of
George's hopes in reference to his cousin. George
Hotspur sent the
curses on the illib
it not cruel that a
an assistance whe
world seemed to
critical moment
emergencies for
Morton. But evei
not ask her for m
Nevertheless,
to be forthcomin
Norfolk. In the
had met a young
parlour, who was
was a young gent
some command o

<#PG# 152>
Lt it was especially
hat look of high
its proper bright-
mke a man-servant
ests; he must fee
have loose cash
He wished it to
- his cousin. He
eart than Altring-
andreds on being
ny; but a roll of
atly aid him in
ounds, as he we}}
e snow. The last
Des quicker than
added a postscript to his letter: “This kind of this
will be over for me very soon. I am to be a Benedi
and the house of Humblethwaite and the title are
be kept together. I know you will congratulate m
My cousin is a charming girl, and worth all that
shall lose ten times over.” It was impossible, }
thought, that the man should refuse him credit fa
eighty pounds till Christmas, when the man shoul
know that he was engaged to be married to £ 20,00
a year! But the man did refuse. The man wrote bac
to say that he did not understand this kind of thin
at all, and that he wanted his money at once. Georg
Hotspur sent the man his money, not without man
curses on the illiberality of such a curmudgeon. Wa
it not cruel that a fellow would not give him so trifling
an assistance when he wanted it so badly? All thi
world seemed to conspire to hurt him just at this mos
critical moment of his life! In many of his hardes
emergencies for ready money he had gone to Mrs
Morton. But even he felt that just at present he could
not ask her for more.
Nevertheless, a certain amount of cash was made
to be forthcoming before he took his departure foi
Norfolk. In the course of the preceding spring he
had met a young gentleman in Mr. Hart's small front
parlour, who was there upon ordinary business. He
was a young gentleman with good prospects, and with
some command of ready money; but he liked to live,
ssible for him to
had put a little
: nothing for of
reas he received
is, he conceived
vhat he had lost.
wrote to ask his
*the money were
it should be sent
Altringham set,
ho had heard of
cousin. George

<#PG# 153>
150
on the very day
servant were retu
from Norfolk, sm
glasses, —George
of beer and spir
happy with a nov
that of the serva
when he learns 1
interviews with
Morton, will be d
going very well fc
does not as yet k
ind would sometimes want Mr. Hart's assistance. His
name was Walker, and though he was not exactly one
of that class in which it delighted Captain Hotspur to
nove, nevertheless he was not altogether disdained by
chat well-born and well-bred gentleman. On the third
of October, the day before he left London to join his
listinguished friends in Norfolk, George Hotspur
changed a cheque for nearly three hundred pounds at
Mr. Walker's banker's. Poor Mr. Walker! But Cousin
George went down to Norfolk altogether in high feather.
If there were play, he would play. He would bet about
pulling straws if he could find an adversary to bet with
im. He could chink sovereigns about at his ease, at
any rate, during the week. Cousin George liked to
Chink sovereigns about at his ease. And this point of
greatness must be conceded to him,--that, however
black might loom the clouds of the coming sky, he
could enjoy the sunshine of the hour.
In the meantime Mr. Boltby was at work, and be-
fore Cousin George had shot his last pheasant in such
very good company, Sir Harry was up in town assisting
Mr. Boltby. How things had gone at Humblethwaite
between Sir Harry and his daughter must not be told
on this page; but the reader may understand that no-
thing had as yet occurred to lessen Sir Harry's ob-
jection to the match. There had been some correspond-
ence between Sir Harry and Mr. Boltby, and Sir Harry
had come up to town. When the reader learns that
Emily Hotspur.
What Sir Ha
not be minutely -
that Cousin Geor
and that when he
of telling the trut
matter of the £
ill-treated. The
service whatever.
Sir Harry nothin
must be explaine
fective informatio
Morton, and four
like Mrs. Morton
ample apology. I
whatever in rega

<#PG# 154>
t's assistance. His
was not exactly one
Captain Hotspur to
ether disdained by
zan. On the third
London to join his
George Hotspur
undred pounds at
alker! But Cousin
er in high feather.
Ce would bet about
wersary to bet with
Dut at his ease, at
George liked to
And this point of
,--that, however
on the very day on which Cousin George and
servant were returning to London by the express tr
from Norfolk, smoking many cigars and drinking ma
glasses,--George of sherry, and the servant proba
of beer and spirits alternately,—each making hims
happy with a novel; George's novel being French, a
that of the servant English sensational,—the read
when he learns that on this very day Sir Harry h
interviews with Captain Stubber and also with M
Morton, will be disposed to think that things were n
going very well for Cousin George. But then the read
does not as yet know the nature of the persistency
Emily Hotspur.
What Sir Harry did with Captain Stubber nee
not be minutely described. There can be no dou.
that Cousin George was not spared by the Captai:
and that when he understood what might be the resu
of telling the truth, he told all that he knew. In the
matter of the £500 Cousin George had really bee
ill-treated. The payment had done him no sort
service whatever. Of Captain Stubber's interview wit
Sir Harry nothing further need now be said. But
must be explained that Sir Harry, led astray by de
fective information, made a mistake in regard to Mrs
Morton, and found out his mistake. He did not much
like Mrs. Morton, but he did not leave her without an
ample apology. From Mrs. Morton he learned nothing
whatever in regard to Cousin George,-nothing bu
coming sky, he
it work, and be
pheasant in such
in town assisting
it Humblethwaite
nust not be told
erstand that no-
Sir Harry's ob-
ome correspond-
, and Sir Harry
ader learns that

<#PG# 155>
tlemen. Sick a
nothing was to t
Though Sir Hari
sence of the Lor
the hour as late
was settled.
At one, Coi
broiled bones an
his meal with s
dissatisfied with
ceding evening
ais, that Mrs. Morton did not deny that she was ac-
uainted with Captain Hotspur. Mr. Boltby had learned,
owever, that Cousin George had drawn the money for
cheque payable to heç order, and he had made him-
elf nearly certain of the very nature of the transaction.
Early on the morning after George's return he was
in to ground by Mr. Boltby's confidential clerk, at
ne hotel behind the club. It was so early, to George
t least, that he was still in bed. But the clerk, who
ad breakfasted at eight, been at his office by nine,
nd had worked hard for two hours and a half since,
id not think it at all early. George, who knew that
is pheasant-shooting pleasure was past, and that im-
nediate trouble was in store for him, had consoled
imself over-night with a good deal of curaçoa and
eltzer and brandy, and had taken these comforting
otations after a bottle of champagne. He was, con-
equently, rather out of sorts when he was run to ground
2 his very bedroom by. Boltby's clerk. He was can-
inkerous at first, and told the clerk to go and be
-d. The clerk pleaded Sir Harry. Sir Harry was
1 town, and wanted to see his cousin. A meeting
just, of course, be arranged. Sir Harry wished that
· might be in Mr. Boltby's, private room. When
Cousin George objected that he did not choose to have
ny interview with Sir Harry in presence of the lawyer,
ne clerk very humbly explained that the private room
"ould be exclusively for the service of the two, gen-
dined on a mut
have gone to be
self in the glass
red,—and a thir
boast to him, —
man made,-tha
himself of all ou
dissipation; but
and now not tw
he kept his app
which he might
might not ruin
that it would be
When he
that there was
him and Sir H
were worth his

<#PG# 156>
y that she was ac-
Boltby had learned,
awn the money for
he had made him-
of the transaction.
ge's return he was
fidential clerk, at
o early, to George
ut the clerk, who
lis ofice by nine,
and a half since,
e, who knew that
ast, and that im-
m, had consoled
of curaçoa and
these comforting
He was, con-
was run to ground
1. He was can
s to go and be
Sir Harry was
sin. A meeting
tlemen. Sick as he was, Cousin George knew
nothing was to be gained by quarrelling with Sir Ha
Though Sir Harry should ask for an interview in ]
sence of the Lord Mayor, he must go to it. He m
the hour as late as he could, and at last three o'cl
was settled.
At one, Cousin George was at work upon
broiled bones and tea laced with brandy, having beg
his meal with soda and brandy. He was altoget
dissatisfied with himself. Had he known on the p
ceding evening what was coming, he would h
dined on a mutton chop and a pint of sherry, a
have gone to bed at ten o'clock. He looked at hi
self in the glass, and saw that he was bloated a
red,—and a thing foul to behold. It was a matter
boast to him, the most pernicious boast that evei
man made,—that in twenty-four hours he could
himself of all outward and inward sign of any spec
dissipation; but the twenty-four hours were neede
and now not twelve were allowed him. Neverthele
he kept his appointment. He tried to invent some
which he might send by a commissioner, and whi
might not ruin him. But he thought upon the who
that it would be safer for him to go.
When he entered the room he saw at a glan
that there was to be war,—war to the knife,-betwe
him and Sir Harry. He perceived at once that if
were worth his while to go on with the thing at a
urry wished that
room. When
I choose to have
e of the lawyer,
je private room
: the two gen-

<#PG# 157>
must do so in sole dependence on the spirit and
e of Emily Hotspur. Sir Harry at their first greet-
g declined to shake hands with him, and called him
-ptain Hotspur.
“Captain Hotspur," he said, “in a word, under-
und that there must be no further question of a mar-
ge between you and my daughter."
“Why not, Sir Harry?”.
"Because, sir~-" and then he paused—“I would
Oner see my girl dead at my feet than entrust her
such a one as you. It was true what you said to
e at Humblethwaite. There would have been some-
ng very alluring to me in the idea of joining the
Sperty and the title together. A man will pay much
- such a whim. I would not unwillingly have paid
-y much in money; but I am not so infamously
Cked as to sacrifice my daughter utterly by giving
r to one so utterly unworthy of her as you are.”
“I told you that I was in debt, Sir Harry.”
“I wanted no telling as to that; but I did want
ling as to your mode of life, and I have had it now.
u had better not press me. You had better see
· Boltby. He will tell you what I am willing to do
you upon receiving your written assurance that
1 will never renew your offer of marriage to Miss
itspur."
“I cannot do that,” said Cousin George, hoarsely.
“Then I shall leave you with your creditors to
deal with as the
suggest myself,
should see Mr. I
“What does
"Were you
Sir Harry. “Bt
"I was," he
ledge so much,
might have said
"There is I
Do you general
Mrs. Morton?"
question was as
was one that I
no difference,
things only to
decline any furt
vise you to see
So saying,
Cousin George
chambers.
After consi
hour, Cousin G
see the lawyer
seeing the law
for nearly an
had been force
not thought it

<#PG# 158>
the spirit and
meir first greet-
and called him
3 word, under-
stion of a mar-
used—“I would
han entrust her
hat you said to
ave been some
of joining the
- will pay much
ngly have paid
so infamously
terly by giving
s you are.”
Harry."
ut I did want
deal with as they please. I have nothing furthe
suggest myself, and I would recommend that
should see Mr. Boltby before you leave the chambe
“What does my cousin say?” he asked.
“Were you at Goodwood last meeting?" a:
Sir Harry. “But of course you were.”
“I was,” he answered. He was obliged to ackr
ledge so much, not quite knowing what Stackp
might have said or done. “But I can explain th
“There is no need whatever of any explanat
Do you generally borrow money from such ladie:
Mrs. Morton?" Cousin George blushed when
question was asked, but made no answer to it.
was one that he could not answer. “But it ma
no difference, Captain Hotspur. I mention th
things only to let you feel that I know you. In
decline any further speech with you. I strongly
vise you to see Mr. Boltby at once. Good afternoc
So saying, the Baronet withdrew quickly,
Cousin George heard him shut the door of
chambers.
After considering the matter for a quarter of
hour, Cousin George made up his mind that he wo
see the lawyer. No harm could come to him fr
seeing the lawyer. He was closeted with Mr. Bol
for nearly an hour, and before he left the cham
had been forced to confess to things of which he k
not thought it possible that Mr. Boltby should e
ve had it now.
nad better see
willing to do
„ssurance that
riage to Miss
ge, hoarsely.
creditors to

<#PG# 159>
ve heard. Mr. Boltby knew the whole story of the
oney raised on the commission, of the liabilities to
th Hart and Stubber, and had acquainted himself
ath the history of Lord Baldebeque's cheque. Mr.
ltby was not indignant, as had been Sir Harry, but
Limated it as a thing beyond dispute that a man
no had done such things as could be proved against
ousin George,-and as would undoubtedly be proved
ainst him if he would not give up his pursuit of the
īress-must be disposed of with severity, unless he
created at once of his own accord. Mr. Boltby did
Heed hint something about a criminal prosecution,
d utter ruin, and—incarceration.
But if George Hotspur would renounce his cousin
erly,-putting his renunciation on paper,--Sir Harry
uld pay all his debts to the extent of twenty
busand pounds, would allow him four hundred a
ir on condition that he would live out of England,
d would leave him a further sum of twenty thousand
unds by his will, on condition that no renewed
ise of offence were given.
“You had better, perhaps, go home and think
put it, Mr. Hotspur," said the lawyer.
Cousin George did go away and think about it.
Sir HARRY,
London in Octot
sins to make hii
posed with all h
from the first mc
tell him of wha
had never thoug)
fitting husband
thinking, he had
outside advanta
fitness which he
lated, and the
the danger wa
see what it was
the misery thre
realize his ow:
for his own
owed to the
was due from
name and title
that he had
been in no

<#PG# 160>
CHAPTER XIII.
I will not desert him.
ble story of the
he liabilities to
uainted himself
3 cheque. Mr.
Sir Harry, but
te that a man
proved against
tedly be proved
s pursuit of the
erity, unless he
Mr. Boltby did
nal prosecution,
munce his cousin
.per, -Sir Harry
ent of twenty
our hundred a
ut of England,
wenty thousand
it no renewed
SIR HARRY, before he had left Humblethwaite
London in October, had heard enough of his cousi
sins to make him sure that the match must be
posed with all his authority. Indeed he had so
from the first moment in which George had begun
tell him of what had occurred at Airey Force.
had never thought that George Hotspur would make
fitting husband for his daughter. But, without
thinking, he had allowed his mind to dwell upon
outside advantages of the connection, dreaming o
fitness which he knew did not exist, till he had va
lated, and the evil thing had come upon him. W}
the danger was so close upon him as to make }
see what it was, to force him to feel what would
the misery threatened to his daughter, to teach him
realize his own duty, he condemned himself bitte
for his own weakness. Could äný đúty which
owed to the world be so high or so holy as that wh
was due from him to his child? He almost hated
ñame and title and position as he thought of the e
that he had already done. Had his cousin Geoi
been in no close succession to the title, would
me and think
nk about it.

<#PG# 161>
ve admitted a man of whom he knew so much ill,
d of whom he had never heard any good, within
park palings? And then he could not but acknow-
ge to himself that by asking such a one to his
use,-a man such as this young cousin who was
own to be the heir to the title,-he had given his
ughter special reason to suppose that she might re-
d him as a fitting suitor for her hand. She of
arse had known-had felt as keenly as he had felt,
was she not a Hotspur?—that she would be true
her family by combining her property and the title,
that by yielding to such a marriage she would be
Eng a family duty, unless there were reasons against
stronger than those connected with his name. But
to those other reasons, must not her father and her
ther know better than she could know? When she
nd that the man was made welcome both in town
I country, was it not natural that she should sup-
ce that there were no stronger reasons? All this Sir
rry felt, and blamed himself and determined that
ugh he must oppose his daughter and make her
lerstand that the hope of such a marriage must be
olutely abandoned, it would be his duty to be very
der with her. He had sinned against her already,
hat he had vacillated and had allowed that hand-
ne but vile and worthless cousin to come near her.
In his conduct to his daughter, Sir Harry en-
voured to be just, and tender, and affectionate;
but in his conduct
lowed himself som
naturally incident
you should have
knew very well wh
Sir Harry
"But I didn't
to remind her hu
the coming of the
"I had told y
done. And then
gether!"
“What could ]
be taken? You v
she should not be
"I would hav
house."
" But the Fit
the poor woman.
"It wouldn't
asked him to st
and to this cha
was no answer.
husband; and
from some dim
as she had so
that all this evil
"I hope she

<#PG# 162>
T
new so much ill,
iny good, within
not but acknow-
ch a one to his
cousin who was
he had given his
at she might re-
· hand. She of
y as he had felt,
? would be true
ty and the title,
ze she would be
reasons against
his name. But
- father and her
ow? When she
e both in town
-he should sup-
s? All this Sir
letermined that
and make her
rriage must be
Luty to be very
it her already,
ed that hand-
ome near her.
ir Harry en-
affectionate;
but in his conduct to his wife on the occasion he
lowed himself some scope for the ill-humour not v
naturally incident to his misfortune. “Why on ear
you should have had him in Bruton Street when y
knew very well what he was, I cannot conceive,” sa
Sir Harry.
“But I didn't know," said Lady Elizabeth, feari:
to remind her husband that he also had sanction
the coming of the cousin.
“I had told you. It was there that the evil w
done. And then to let them go to that picnic t
gether!”
“What could I do when Mrs. Fitzpatrick asked
be taken? You wouldn't have had me tell Emily th
she should not be one of the party."
“I would have put it off till he was out of ti
house."
“But the Fitzpatricks were going too,” pleade
the poor woman.
“It wouldn't have happened at all if you had na
asked him to stay till the Monday,” said Sir Harry
and to this charge Lady Elizabeth knew that thei
was no answer. There she had clearly disobeyed he
husband; and though she doubtless suffered muc
from some dim idea of injustice, she was aware th:
as she had so offended she must submit to be tol
that all this evil had come from her wrong-doing.
"I hope she will not be obstinate,” said Sir Harr

<#PG# 163>
60
his wife. Lady Elizabeth, though she was not an
cute judge of character, did know her own daughter,
nd was afraid to say that Emily would not be obstinate.
he had the strongest possible respect as well as affec-
on for her own child; she thoroughly believed in
mily—much more thoroughly than she did in herself.
ut she could not say that in such a matter Emily
ould not be obstinate. Lady Elizabeth was very
timately connected with two obstinate persons, one
E whom was young and the other old; and she thought
at perhaps the younger was the more obstinate of
e two.
"It is quite out of the question that she should
arry him,” said Sir Harry, sadly. Still Lady Eliza-
eth made no reply. "I do not think that she will
sobey me,” continued Sir Harry. Still Lady Eliza-
eth said nothing. "If she gives me a promise, she
ill keep it,” said Sir Harry.
Then the mother could answer, “I am sure she
ill.”
“If the worst come to the worst, we must go.
or perhaps to Eg
to her!—that is, i
"Is he so very
“He is a liar
to be a swindler,
beth was mute, ai
At this time
pawning of the cc
of money raised
to ground that lie
he had not yet he:
The only attack
yet been made in
reference to the
was a lady of so
society liked to sh
and well informed
vay.”
“To Scarrowby?” suggested Lady Elizabeth, who
ited Scarrowby.
"That would do no good. Scarrowby would be
e same as Humblethwaite to her, or perhaps worse.
mean abroad. We must shut up the place for a
uple of years, and take her to Naples and Vienna,
Cousin George.
good deal said at
the affair reached
Cousin George 1
should be made
it was very diff
everybody else
the Goodwood
enough; she con
of evil of Mr. ar
Sir Harry Hotspur

<#PG# 164>
gh she was not an
her own daughter,
ld not be obstinate.
ect as well as affec-
-ughly believed in
she did in herself,
ch a matter Emily
Eizabeth was very
mate persons, one
1; and she thought
more obstinate of
that she should
Still Lady Eliza-
cink that she will
Still Lady Eliza-
2 a promise, she
or perhaps. to Egypt. Everything must be chang
to her!—that is, if the evil has gone deep enough.”
“Is he so very bad?” asked Lady Elizabeth.
“He is a liar and a blackguard, and I believe hi
to be a swindler,” said Sir Harry. Then Lady Eliz
beth was mute, and her husband left her.
At this time he had heard the whole story of t]
pawning of the commission, had been told somethir
of money raised by worthless cheques, and had ru
to ground that lie about the Goodwood races. B
he had not yet heard anything special of Mrs. Morto
The only attack on George's character which had a
yet been made in the hearing of Emily had been wit
reference to the Goodwood races. Mrs. Stackpool
was.man lady of some determination, and one who i
society liked to show that she was right in her assertion:
and well informed on matters in dispute; and she hate
Cousin George. There had therefore come to be
good deal said about the Goodwood meeting, so tha
the affair reached Sir Harry's ears. He perceived tha
Cousin George had lied, and determined that Emil
- should be made to know that her cousin had lied. Bu
it was very difficult to persuade her of this. Tha
everybody else should tell stories about George anc
the Goodwood meeting seemed to her to be natura
enough; she contented herself with thinking all manne
of evil of Mr. and Mrs. Stackpoole, and reiterating hei
Sir Harry Hotspur.
"'I am sure she
t, we must go
Elizabeth, who
owby would be
perhaps worse.
he place for a
es and Vienna,
II

<#PG# 165>
62
onviction that George Hotspur had not been at the
meeting in question.
“I don't know that it much signifies,” Mrs. Stack-
soole had said in anger.
“Not in the least,” Emily had replied, “only that
happen to know that my cousin was not there. He
oes to so many race meetings that there has been
ome little mistake.”
Then Mr. Stackpoole had written to Cousin George,
nd Cousin George had thought it wise to make no
eply. Sir Harry, however, from other sources had
onvinced himself of the truth, and had told his
laughter that there was evidence enough to prove the
act in any court of law. Emily when so informed
nad simply held her tongue, and had resolved to hate
Irse Stackpoole worse than ever.
She had been told from the first that her engage-
nent with her cousin would not receive her father's
anction; and for some days after that there had been
ilence on the subject at Humblethwaite, while the
correspondence with Mr. Boltby was being continued.
Then there came the moment in which Sir Harry felt
hat he must call upon his daughter to promise obedience,
ind the conversation which has been described between
nim and Lady Elizabeth was preparatory to his doing so.
“My dear," he said to his daughter, “sit down; I
vant to speak to you.”
He had sent for her into his own morning room,
in which she did
sit down before.
coming in and ou
suggesting that he
loan of a gardene
own, telling him
ruthlessly on any
occasions she wou
him. And he wou
or bid her begone
grant what she as
hardly knew that it
had been the brig
this morning he ha
room.
"Emily," he si
this about your
She made no rep
minute. “It is a
very, very sorry t]
a sorrow. I will
letting him come
“No, Papa, n
“Yes, my de
it keenly. I did
do now, but I hac
me careful to kee

<#PG# 166>
JR
16:
d not been at the
nifies," Mrs. Stack-
replied, "only that
was not there. He
hat there has been
to Cousin George,
wise to make no
other sources had
and had told his
ough to prove the
when so informed
d resolved to hate
in which she did not remember to have been asked to
sit down before. She would often visit him there
coming in and out on all manner of small occasions
suggesting that he should ride with her, asking for the
loan of a gardener for a week for some project of her
own, telling him of a big gooseberry, interrupting him
ruthlessly on any trifle in the world. But on such
occasions she would stand close to him, leaning on
him. And he would scold her,-playfully, or kiss her,
or bid her begone from the room,but would always
grant what she asked of him. To him, though he
hardly knew that it was so, such visits from his darling
had been the bright moments of his life. But up to
this morning he had never bade her be seated in that
room.
"Emily,” he said, “I hope you understand that all
this about your cousin George must be given up.”
She made no reply, though he waited perhaps for a
minute. “It is altogether out of the question. I am
very, very sorry that you have been subjected to such
a sorrow. I will own that I have been to blame for
letting him come to my house.”
“No, Papa, no.”
“Yes, my dear, I have been to blame, and I feel
it keenly. I did not then know as much of him as I
do now, but I had heard that which should have made
me careful to keep him out of your company."
t that her engage-
ceive her father's
at there had been
waite, while the
being continued.
ich Sir Harry felt
romise obedience,
lescribed between
y to his doing so.
er, "sit down; I
i morning room,

<#PG# 167>
164
inquire into these
to obey me.” The
no reply to him.
there that mark a
often showed him
with his father. “
when I tell you th
"He need not
"His conduct
trusted with anythi
“He must be
Papa."
“Hearing about people, Papa! Is that fair? Are
we not always hearing tales about everybody?”.
“My dear child, you must take my word for some-
thing."
“I will take it for everything in all the world, Papa."
“He has been a thoroughly bad young man.”
“But, Papa---"
“You must take my word for it when I tell you
that I have positive proof of what I am telling you.”
“But, Papa--"
“Is not that enough?”
“No, Papa. I am heartily sorry that he should
have been what you call a bad young man. I wish
young men weren't so bad;—that there were no race-
courses, and betting, and all that. But if he had been
my brother instead of my cousin-~".
: “Don't talk about your brother, Emily."
“Should we hate him because he has been un-
steady? Should we not do all that we could in the
world to bring him back? I do not know that we
are to hate people because they do what they ought
not to do."
“We hate liars."
“He is not a liar. I will not believe it.”
“Why did he tell you that he was not at those
races, when he was there as surely as you are here?
But, my dear, I will not argue about all this with you.
It is not right that I should do so. It is my duty to
“That is our
feel it as I do. I
greater misfortune
“If he was so
“That is true.
you, Emily, but I
"Dear, dear
rebuke you. But
"You must giv
: “No, Papa.
not be false. You
that, but I will no
one minute."
"It is of no u:
"But you will
me when I speak

<#PG# 168>
165
SPUR
2! Is that fair? Are
it everybody?”
ke my word for some
2 all the world, Papa."
bad young man."
or it when I tell you
t I am telling you."
sorry that he should
young man. I wish
t there were no race-
But if he had been
--"
1, Emily."
je he has been un-
hat we could in the
| not know that we
do what they ought
inquire into these things, and yours to believe me and
to obey me.” Then he paused, but his daughter made
no reply to him. He looked into her face, and saw
there that mark about her eyes which he knew he so
often showed himself; which he so well remembered
with his father. “I suppose you do believe me, Emily,
when I tell you that he is worthless."
“He need not be worthless always.":
“His conduct has been such that he is unfit to be
trusted with anything."
“He must be the head of our family some day,
Papa.”
“That is our misfortune, my dear. No one can
feel it as I do. But I need not add to it the much
greater misfortune of sacrificing to him my only child.”
“If he was so bad, why did he come here?”
. “That is true. I did not expect to be rebuked by
you, Emily, but I am open to that rebuke.”
“Dear, dear Papa, indeed I did not mean to
rebuke you. But I cannot give him up.”
"You must give him up.”
: “No, Papa. If I did, I should be false. I will
not be false. You say that he is false. I do not know
that, but I will not be false. Let me speak to you for
one minute.”
“It is of no use.”
“But you will hear me, Papa. You always hear
me when I speak to you.” She had left her chair
believe it.”
e was not at those
ly as you are here?
it all this with you.
. It is my duty to

<#PG# 169>
166
young men do.
not believe, so w
so was Mr. Stac
“But Mr. Sta
"I don't kno
her head.
"Emily, you
think it."
"I care note
i
now, and was standing close to him, not leaning upon
him as was her wont in their pleasantest moments of
fellowship, but ready to do so whenever she should
find that his mood would permit it. “I will never
marry him without your leave.”
“Thanks, Emily; I know how sacred is a promise
from you.” Shot
; “But mine to him is equally sacred. I shall still
be engaged to him. I told him how it would be. I .
, said that, as long as you or Mamma lived, I would
never marry without your leave. Nor would I see him,
or write to him without your knowledge. I told him
so. But I told him also that I would always be true
to him. I mean to keep my word.”
“If you find him to be utterly worthless, you cannot
be bound by such a promise.”
“I hope it may not be so. I do not believe that
it is so. I know him too well to think that he can be
utterly worthless. But if he was, who should try to
save him from worthlessness if not his nearest relatives?
We try to reclaim the worst criminals, and sometimes
we succeed. And he must be the head of the family.
Remember that. Ought we not to try to reclaim him?
He cannot be worse than the prodigal son.”
“He is ten times worse. I cannot tell you what
has been his life.” why notammzeil et
“Papa, I have often thought that in our rank of
life society is responsible for the kind of things which
tells truth or no
selves very disagr
he is what he is,
to be the same."
“You do not
“I know as
one keep as clea
to hear how you
to go everywhere
do not pretend
wish he were.
he belongs in a
him. He beloi
desert him."
Sir Harry fel
a girl as this.
it was unfit that
ment with his o

<#PG# 170>
SPUR
rim, not leaning upon
easantest moments of
whenever she should
it it. “I will never
v sacred is a promise
sacred. I shall still
how it would be. I
imma lived, I would
Nor would I see him,
owledge. I told him
vould always be true
d.”
worthless, you cannot
young men do. If he was at Goodwood, which I
not believe, so was Mr. Stackpoole. If he was betti
so was Mr. Stackpoole."
“But Mr. Stackpoole did not lie.”
"I don't know that,” she said, with a little toss
her head.
“Emily, you have no business either to say or
think it.”
“I care nothing for Mr. Stackpoole whether
tells truth or not. He and his wife have made the
selves very disagreeable,--that is all. But as for Georg
he is what he is, because other young men are allow
to be the same."
“You do not know the half of it."
“I know as much as I want to know, Papa. I
one keep as clear of it as one can, it is impossible n
to hear how young men live. And yet they are allow
to go everywhere, and are flattered and encouraged.
do not pretend that George is better than others.
wish he were. Oh, how I wish it! But such as he
he belongs in a way to us, and we ought not to dese
him. He belongs, I know, to me, and I will n
desert him.”
Sir Harry felt that there was no arguing with su
a girl as this. Some time since he had told her th
it was unfit that he should be brought into an arg
ment with his own child, and there was nothing no
I do not believe that
think that he can be
, who should try to
his nearest relatives?
nals, and sometimes
: head of the family.
try to reclaim him?
ligal son."
annot tell you what
hat in our rank of
ind of things which

<#PG# 171>
58
to him of buyii
George should I
"You had t
his last speech.
have made me.
you also may I
your father that
and that I sho
describe to you
marriage."
Emily made
ir him but to fall back upon the security which that
ssertion gave him. He could not charge her with
irect disobedience, because she had promised him
at she would not do any of those things which, as
father, he had a right to forbid. He relied fully on
er promise, and so far might feel himself to be safe.
evertheless he was very unhappy. Of what service
ould his child be to him or he to her, if he were
oomed to see her pining from day to day with an
npermitted love? It was the dearest wish of his
eart to make her happy, as it was his fondest ambi-
on to see her so placed in the world that she might
e the happy transmitter of all the honours of the
ouse of Humblethwaite,-if she could not transmit
Il the honours of the name. Time might help him.
und then if she could be made really to see how base
as the clay of which had been made this image
-hich she believed to be of gold, might it not be that
t last she would hate a thing that was so vile? In
rder that she might do so, he would persist in finding
ut what had been the circumstances of this young
jan's life. If, as he believed, the things which George
Lotspur had done were such as in another rank of
fe would send the perpetrator to the treadmill, surely
nen she would not cling to her lover. It would not
e in her nature to prefer that which was foul and
bominable and despised of all men. It was after this,
'hen he had seen Mr. Boltby, that the idea occurred
without having
That look of
alone. What w
the result? Sh
only promise w
the same time
tenance, as wel
as faithful to 1
obedient to her
a long contest
her devoted yes
not even try to
able to bear it?
self to be as te
would be more
would be nothil
ever to be a que

<#PG# 172>
security which that
- charge her with
ad promised him
e things which, as
He relied fully on
Enimself to be safe.
Of what service
her, if he were
y to day with an
arest wish of his
his fondest ambi-
-rld that she might
to him of buying up Cousin George, so that Coi
George should himself abandon his engagement.
“You had better go now, my dear,” he said, a
his last speech. “I fully rely upon the promise
have made me. I know that I can rely upon it. !
you also may rely upon me. I give you my word
your father that this man is unfit to be your husba
and that I should commit a sin greater than I .
describe to you were I to give my sanction to suc)
marriage.”
Emily made no answer to this, but left the ro
without having once leaned upon her father's should
That look of hers troubled him sadly when he v
alone. What was to be the meaning of it, and w
the result? She had given him almost unasked
only promise which duty required her to give, but
the same time she had assured him by her cou
tenance, as well as by her words, that she would
as faithful to her lover as she was prepared to
obedient to her father. And then if there should co
a long contest of that nature, and if he should :
her devoted year after year to a love which she wou
not even try to cast off from her, how would he
able to bear it? He, too, was firm, but he knew hi
self to be as tender-hearted as he was obstinate.
would be more than he could bear. All the wo
would be nothing for him then. And if there we
ever to be a question of yielding, it would be eas
e honours of the
could not transmit
e might help him.
y to see how base
made this image
ght it not be that
was so vile? In
{ persist in finding
es of this young
ngs which George
another rank of
treadmill, surely
t. It would not
h was foul and
It was after this,
he idea occurred

<#PG# 173>
O
do something towards lessening the vileness of the
an now than hereafter. He, too, had some of that
nowledge of the world which had taught Lady Altring-
im to say that the young people in such contests
vuld always beat the old people. Thinking of this,
id of that look upon his child's brows, he almost
cillated again. Any amount of dissipation he could
bw have forgiven; but to be a liar, too, and a swind-
r! Before he went to bed that night he had made
5 his mind to go to London and to see Mr. Boltby.
On the d
last chapter
Elizabeth an
great house a
dearly. The
tween them, a
But the love
stronger on t
never snubbe
never cross;
and keen inte
and loved it
ness. She p
could say she
father.
Hitherto
as to her lov
mother, an
second-hand
she had onl
Elizabeth ha
this. It cert

<#PG# 174>
CHAPTER XIV.
the vileness of the
had some of that
ight Lady Altring-
in such contests
Thinking of this,
brows, he almost
ssipation he could
too, and a swind-
ight he had made
see Mr. Boltby.
Pertinacity.
On the day but one after the scene narrated
last chapter Sir Harry went to London, and
Elizabeth and Emily were left alone together i
great house at Humblethwaite. Emily loved her r
dearly. The proper relations of life were reverse
tween them, and the younger domineered over the
But the love which the daughter felt was probab
stronger on this account. Lady Elizabeth never sco
never snubbed, never made herself disagreeable
never cross; and Emily, with her strong perce
and keen intelligence, knew all her mother's excel
and loved it the better because of her mother's
ness. She preferred her father's company, but n
could say she neglected her mother for the sake «
father.
Hitherto she had said very little to Lady Eliz
as to her lover. She had, in the first place, tol
mother, and then had received from her m
second-hand, her father's disapproval. At that
she had only said that it was "too late.” Poor
Elizabeth had been able to make no useful ansv
this. It certainly was too late. The evil should

<#PG# 175>
avoided by refusing admittance to Cousin George
in London and at Humblethwaite. It certainly
too late;--too late, that is, to avoid the evil al-
Eher. The girl had been asked for her heart, and
given it. It was very much too late. But evils
as that do admit of remedy. It is not every girl
can marry the man whom she first confesses that
loves. Lady Elizabeth had some idea that her
1, being nobler born and of more importance than
people's children, ought to have been allowed by
to do so,--as there certainly is a something with-
-n from the delicate aroma of a first-class young
an by any transfer of affections;—but if it might
Se so, even an Emily Hotspur must submit to a lot
uncommon among young women in general, and
and wish till she could acknowledge to herself
her heart was susceptible of another wound. That
the mother's hope at present,-her hope, when
was positively told by Sir Harry that George Hot-
was quite out of the question as a husband for
neiress of Humblethwaite. But this would probably
e the sooner if little or nothing were said of George
her rich pres
nothing in th
understood it
could never
that she had
offering. She
had afterward
had been we
disposed of I
was not so,
of herself wor
it be as it mi
He had a rig
from him. I
by all church
worse" were
Here there ha
fore her duty
pur.
The reader need hardly be told that Emily herself
ided the matter in a very different light. She
had her ideas about the delicacy and the aroma
maiden's love. She had confessed her love very
dy to the man who had asked for it; had made
of sacrifice,
bad, which
and sanctifie
mise as by
and by what
fitting betwee
that compell-
call love?
than everyth
him was a ly

<#PG# 176>
to Cousin George
ite. It certainly
avoid the evil al-
or her heart, and
late. But evils
is not every girl
st confesses that
e idea that her
importance than
been allowed by
something with
first-class young
-but if it might
submit to a lot
n general, and
edge to herself
I wound. That
er hope, when
at George Hot-
a husband for
vould probably
said of George
her rich present with a free hand, and had gru
nothing in the making of it. But having given it
understood it to be fixed as the heavens that
could never give the same gift again. It was h
that she had given, and there was no retractin
offering. She had thought, and had then hoped
had afterwards hoped more faintly, that the pi
had been well bestowed;—that in giving it she
disposed of herself well. Now they told her t]
was not so, and that she could hardly have disi
of herself worse. She would not believe that; bu
it be as it might, the thing was done. She was
He had a right in her which she could not with
from him. Was not this sort of giving acknowle
by all churches in which the words for “better
worse” were uttered as part of the marriage
Here there had been as yet no church vow, and t
fore her duty was still due to her father. But the
of sacrifice,-so often a sacrifice of the good to
bad, which the Church not only allowed but req
and sanctified, could be as well conveyed by one
mise as by another. What is a vow but a proi
and by what process are such vows and promises i
fitting between a man and a woman? Is it nc
that compelled rendering up of the heart which
call love? She had found that he was dearer to
than everything in the world besides; that to be
him was a luxury to her; that his voice was mus
Emily herself
t light. She
und the aroma
her love very
t; had made

<#PG# 177>
upon her. At
should any ma
world called hi
for wrongs do
whole theory
forgiveness fro:
one to reclaim
not be her dut
very fact that s
potentiality tha
other prodigal.
would at least
; that the flame of his eyes was sunlight; that his
ch was to her, as had never been the touch of any
er human being. She could submit to him, she
never would submit to any one. She could delight
do his bidding, even though it were to bring him
slippers. She had confessed nothing of this, even
verself, till he had spoken to her on the bridge;
then, in a moment, she had known that it was so,
E had not coyed the truth with him by a single nay,
now they told her that he was bad.
Bad as he was, he had been good enough to win
'Twas thus she argued with herself. Who was
that she should claim for herself the right of
Eng a man that was not bad? That other man
had come to her, that Lord Alfred, was, she was
, good at all points; and he had not moved her in
least. His voice had possessed no music for her;
as for fetching his slippers for him,-he was to
one of those men who seem to be created just
they might be civil when wanted and then get
of the way! She had not been able for a moment
oring herself to think of regarding him as her hus-
2. But this man, this bad man! From the moment
he had spoken to her on the bridge, she knew
she was his for ever.
It might be that she liked a bad man best. So she
ned with herself again. If it were so she must put
with what misfortune her own taste might bring.
be near enoug
she filled her
probation, in w
should be giver
so that at last
that should be
a task before I
him and give a
impatient excep
thought of this
would not be ea
almost heart-br
him, and it wo
be successful, 1
triumph! Even
it would be her

<#PG# 178>
sunlight; that his
the touch of any
mit to him, she
She could delight
vere to bring him
r on the bridge;
in that it was so,
i by a single nay.
ad.
d enough to win
rself. Who was
elf the right of
That other man
d, was, she was
lot moved her in
3 music for her;
im,-he was to
be created just
i and then get
e for a moment
aim as her hus-
om the moment
upon her. At any rate the thing was done, and
should any man be thrown over simply because
world called him bad? Was there to be no forgiver
for wrongs done between man and man, when
whole theory of our religion was made to depend
forgiveness from God to man? It is the duty of sc
one to reclaim an evident prodigal; and why shoul.
not be her duty to reclaim this prodigal? Clearly,
very fact that she loved the prodigal would give he
potentiality that way which she would have with
other prodigal. It was at any rate her duty to try.
would at least be her duty if they would allow her
be near enough to him to make the attempt. Th
she filled her mind with ideas of a long period
probation, in which every best energy of her existen
should be given to this work of reclaiming the prodig
so that at last she might put her own hand into o
that should be clean enough to receive it. With su
a task before her she could wait. She could wat
him and give all her heart to his welfare, and never
impatient except that he might be made happy. As s.
thought of this, she told herself plainly that the wo
would not be easy, that there would be disappointmer
almost heart-break, delays and sorrows; but she love
him, and it would be her duty; and then, if she cou.
be successful, how great, how full of joy would be tł
triumph! Even if she were to fail and perish in failin;
it would be her duty. As for giving him up becaus
Ige, she knew
a best. So she
, she must put
might bring

<#PG# 179>
76
if it had not b
when he cam
always asked to
“What do
"I do not :
do all these th
debt, and bett
very wrong. Bi
up in that way,
over by his ne
epithet was ut
Emily could giv
tion."
e had the misfortune to be bad, she would as soon
cive him up on the score of any other misfortune;-
ecause he might lose a leg, or become deformed, or
e stricken deaf by God's hand! One does not desert
nose one loves, because of their misfortunes! 'Twas
yus she argued with herself, thinking that she could
ze,-whereas, poor child, she was so very blind!
“Mamma,” she said, “has Papa gone up to town
bout Cousin George?”
"I do not know, my dear. He did not say why he
-as going.”
“I think he has. I wish I could make him under-
Eand."
“Understand what, my dear?”
“All that I feel about it. I am sure it would save
im much trouble. Nothing can ever separate me from
ay cousin.”
“Pray don't say so, Emily."
"Nothing can. Is it not better that you and he
zould know the truth? Papa goes about trying to find
ut all the naughty things that George has ever done.
here has been some mistake about a race meeting,
nd all manner of people are asked to give what Papa
alls evidence that Cousin George was there. I do
ot doubt but George has been what people call
ssipated.”
“We do hear such dreadful stories!"mron de ling
“You would not have thought anything about them
"I am afraid
Emily."
"So much t?
If a man be in
him a rope beca
"But, deares
Elizabeth was
to her daughte
than the man,
be much great
the rope is not
"And I am
"But if it
the wickedest
slronderval
Sir Harry Hots

<#PG# 180>
she would as soon
Other misfortune;-
come deformed, or
ne does not desert
misfortunes! 'Twas
ing that she could
so very blind!
a gone up to town
did not say why he
make him under-
if it had not been for me. He is not worse now t
when he came down here last year. And he
always asked to Bruton Street.”
“What do you mean by this, dear?"
“I do not mean to say that young men ought
do all these things, whatever they are,-getting ii
debt, and betting, and living fast. Of course it
very wrong. But when a young man has been broug
up in that way, I do think he ought not to be throt
over by his nearest and dearest friends”-that la
epithet was uttered with all the emphasis whi
Emily could give to it—"because he falls into tempt
tion.”
“I am afraid George has been worse than other
Emily.”
"So much the more reason for trying to save him
If a man be in the water, you do not refuse to thro
him a rope because the water is deep.”
“But, dearest, your papa is thinking of you.” Lad
Elizabeth was not quick enough of thought to explai
to her daughter that if the rope be of more valui
than the man, and if the chance of losing the rop
be much greater than that of saving the man, ther
the rope is not thrown.
“And I am thinking of George," said Emily.
“But if it should appear that he had done things,
the wickedest things in the world?”
Sir Harry Hotspur.
sure it would save
r separate me from
that you and he
bout trying to find
ge has ever done.
ta race meeting,
to give what Papa
was there. I do
what people call
sluon
line
Mondercal
12
thing about them

<#PG# 181>
where any ma
will be at the
Papa and you
he allowed to
-if he be so I
be all the wor.
To such a
little to say thi
Sir Harry, and
Cousin George
quite so black
"I might break my heart in thinking of it, but I
hould never give him up."
“If he were a murderer?” suggested Lady Eliza-
eth, with horror.
The girl paused, feeling herself to be hardly pressed,
nd then came that look upon her brow which Lady
Clizabeth understood as well as did Sir Harry. “Then
would be a murderer's wife,” she said.
“Oh, Emily!”
“I must make you understand me, Mamma, and I
vant Papa to understand it too. No consideration on
arth shall make me say that I will give him up. They
nay prove if they like that he was on all the race-
ourses in the world, and get that Mrs. Stackpoole to
swear to it;—and it is ten times worse for a woman
o go than it is for a man, at any rate;—but it will
make no difference. If you and Papa tell me not to
cee him or write to him,-much less to marry him,-
of course I shall obey you. But I shall not give him
up a bit the more, and he must not be told that I will
give him up. I am sure Papa will noi wish that any-
hing untrue should be told. George will always be to
ne the dearest thing in the whole world,-dearer than
y own soul. I shall pray for him every night, and
nink of him all day long. And as to the property,
Papa may be quite sure that he can never arrange it
y any marriage that I shall make. No man shall ever
peak to me in that way, if I can help it. I won't go

<#PG# 182>
PUR
hinking of it, but I
ggested Lady Eliza-
'to be hardly pressed,
er brow which Lady
d Sir Harry. “Then
e said.
where any man can speak to me. I will obey,--bu
will be at the cost of my life. Of course I will ol
Papa and you; but I cannot alter my heart. Why
he allowed to come here,—the head of our own fam
--if he be so bad as this? Bad or good, he will alwa
be all the world to me.”
To such a daughter as this Lady Elizabeth had ve
little to say that might be of avail. She could que
Sir Harry, and entertain some dim distant wish th
Cousin George might even yet be found to be a
quite so black as he had been painted.
me, Mamma, and I
No consideration on
give him up. They
vas on all the race
- Mrs. Stackpoole to
worse for a woman
ty rate;—but it will
Papa tell me not to
ess to marry him,-
: shall not give him
t be told that I will
no. wish that any-
ge will always be to
world,-dearer than
n every night, and
as to the property,
in never arrange it
No man shall ever
jelp it. I won't go
129

<#PG# 183>
30
CHAPTER XV.
Cousin George is hard pressed.
would be alm
amount; and i
sity of a reside
to get the you
If the young I
ings, the matte
as to settling
clearly against i
could on post-
The very sensible and, as one would have thought,
-ery manifest idea of buying up Cousin George
originated with Mr. Boltby. “He will have his price,
Sir Harry,” said the lawyer. Then Sir Harry's eyes
were opened, and so excellent did this mode of escape
seem to him that he was ready to pay almost any price
For the article. He saw it at a glance. Emily had
nigh-flown notions, and would not yield; he feared
that she would not yield, let Cousin George's delin-
quencies be shown to be as black as Styx. But if
Cousin George could be made to give her up,—then
Emily must yield; and, yielding in such manner,
having received so rude a proof of her lover's un-
worthiness, it could not be but that her heart would
be changed. Sir Harry's first idea of a price was very
noble; all debts to be paid, a thousand a year for the
present, and Scarrowby to be attached to the title. What
price would be too high to pay for the extrication of
his daughter from so grievous a misfortune? But Mr.
Boltby was more calm. As to the payment of the
debts, yes, within a certain liberal limit. For the
present, an income of five hundred pounds he thought
the offer was m
is already acqua
lawyer's chambei
and Mr. Boltby
for perpetuating
Hart and Stubbe
young man shou
creditors, who
certain condition
George Hots)
was, did not at
and Mr. Boltby
was asked to giv
if he did so a CE
niary assistance
did not at the fir
the price of the
would meanly ha
have been very E

<#PG# 184>
PUR
al
essed
would have thought
up Cousin George
will have his price,
nen Sir Harry's eyes
this mode of escape
pay almost any price
glance. Emily had
aot yield; he feared
usin George's delin-
.ck as Styx. But if
give her up,—then
g in such manner,
of her lover's un-
hat her heart would
of a price was very
would be almcsi as efficacious a bait as double t]
amount; and it would be well to tack to it the nece
sity of a residence abroad. It might, perhaps, ser
to get the young man out of the country for a tim
If the young man bargained on either of these heat
ings, the matter could be reconsidered by Mr. Boltby
as to settling Scarrowby on the title, Mr. Boltby wa
clearly against it. “He would raise every shilling h
could on post-obits within twelve months.” At la:
the offer was made in the terms with which the reade
is already acquainted. George was sent off from th
lawyer's chambers with directions to consider the terms
and Mr. Boltby gave his clerk some little instruction
for perpetuating the irritation on the young man which
Hart and Stubber together were able to produce. Th
young man should be made to understand that hungr
creditors, who had been promised their money or
certain conditions, could become very hungry indeed
George Hotspur, blackguard and worthless as he
was, did not at first realize the fact that Sir Harry
and Mr. Boltby were endeavouring to buy him. He
was asked to give up his cousin, and he was told that
if he did so a certain very generous amount of pecu-
niary assistance should be given to him; but yet he
did not at the first glance perceive that one was to be
the price of the other,--that if he took the one he
would meanly have sold the other. It certainly would
have been very pleasant to have all his debts paid for
isand a year for the
ed to the title. What
ir the extrication of
isfortune? But Mr.
le payment of the
ral limit. For the
pounds he thought

<#PG# 185>
82
Street; in wh
declared that
of his love, o
the family."
settlements,"
entailed upon
I need not sa
my own son."
But, on th
ideas were mor
which tended t
they had run o
going through
im, and the offer of five hundred pounds a year was
ery comfortable. Of the additional sum to be given
when Sir Harry should die, he did not think so much,
t might probably be a long time coming, and then
Sir Harry would of course be bound to do something
or the title. As for living abroad,-he might promise
hat, but they could not make him keep his promise.
He would not dislike to travel for six months, on con-
Hition that he should be well provided with ready
money. There was much that was alluring in the
Offer, and he began to think whether he could not get
Et all without actually abandoning his cousin. But
Then he was to give a written pledge to that effect,
which, if given, no doubt would be shown to her.
No; that would not do. Emily was his prize; and
though he did not value her at her worth, not under-
standing such worth, still he had an idea that she
would be true to him. Then at last came upon him
an understanding of the fact, and he perceived that a
bribe had been offered to him.
For half a day he was so disgusted at the idea that
his virtue was rampant within him. Sell his Emily for
money? Never! His Emily, and all her rich pro-
spects, and that for a sum so inadequate! They little
knew their man when they made a proposition so vile!
That evening, at his club, he wrote a letter to Sir
Harry, and the letter as soon as written was put into
the club letter-box, addressed to the house in Bruton
himself that he
on Sir Harry-
twelvemonth 01
him,—and that
precarious as to
ward decency
Emily's suitor.
offer made to I
Sir Harry ought
that his letter ti
been considerer
been written
Something mig!
producing read
had a flavours

<#PG# 186>
ja
pounds a year was
ial sun to be givea
not think so much.
coming, and then
od to do something
-he might promise
m keep his promise.
six months, on con
rovided with ready
was alluring in the
her he could not get
g his cousin. But
Ledge to that effect,
3 be shown to her.
was his prize; and
r worth, not under-
I an idea that she
last came upon him
he perceived that a
Street; in which, with much indignant eloquence,
declared that the Baronet little understood the warr
of his love, or the extent of his ambition in regard
the family. “I shall be quite ready to submit to a
settlements,” he said, “so long as the property
entailed upon the Baronet who shall come after myse
I need not say that I hope the happy fellow may
my own son.”
But, on the next morning, on his first waking,
ideas were more vague, and a circumstance happen
which tended to divert them from the current in whi
they had run on the preceding evening. When he w
going through the sad work of dressing, he bethoug
himself that he could not at once force this marria
on Sir Harry—could not do so, perhaps, within
twelvemonth or more, let Emily be ever so true
him,-and that his mode of living had become
precarious as to be almost incompatible with that oi
ward decency which would be necessary for him
Emily's suitor. He was still very indignant at t
offer made to him, which was indeed bribery of whi
Sir Harry ought to be ashamed; but he almost regretti
that his letter to Sir Harry had been sent. It had n
been considered enough, and certainly should not ha
been written simply on after-dinner consideratio.
Something might have been inserted with the view
producing ready money, something which might har
had a flavour of yielding, but which could not hav
.sted at the idea that
Sell his Emily for
i all her rich pro-
equate! They little
proposition so vile!
rote a letter to Sir
vritten was put into
he house in Bruton

<#PG# 187>
en shown to Emily as an offer on his part to abandon
I; and then he had a general feeling that his letter
d been too grandiloquent,—all arising, no doubt,
om a fall in courage incidental to a sick stomach.
But before he could get out of his hotel a visitor
as upon him. Mr. Hart desired to see him. At this
coment he would almost have preferred to see Captain
Eubber. He remembered at the moment that Mr.
Cart was acquainted with Mr. Walker, and that Mr.
Jalker would probably have sought the society of Mr.
Hart after a late occurrence in which he, Cousin George,
ad taken part. He was going across to breakfast at
Lis club, when he found himself almost forced to
ccompany Mr. Hart into a little private room at the
eft hand of the hall of the hotel. He wanted his
reakfast badly, and was altogether out of humour.
le had usually found Mr. Hart to be an enduring
ian, not irascible, though very pertinacious, and
ometimes almost good-natured. For a moment he
hought he would bully Mr. Hart, but when he looked
ito Mr. Hart's face, his heart misgave him. “This
a most inconvenient time--" he had begun. But
3 hesitated, and Mr. Hart began his attack at once.
“Captain 'Oshspur-sir, let me tell you this von't
i no longer."
“What won't do, Mr. Hart?”
“ Vat yon't do? You know vat von't do. Let me
tell you this.
if you don't d
"Me at thi
“Yes, Caj
In vat vay di
Valker? I knu
pounds! It wa
“Who says
"I says so
Bullbean. Mr.
was a gentlema
made one of th
ment, by mean
flush of money,
in Norfolk. "
moneys? It va
very hard."
"It was fair
"Gammon,
“What busi
"Oh, very
before a magi:
how that vill
the fortune."
“How will
"Look here
vil help me,
help everybody
----
------

<#PG# 188>
PUR
i his part to abandon
eeling that his letter
arising, no doubt,
o a sick stomach.
of his hotel a visitor
to see him. At this
ferred to see Captain
; moment that Mr.
alker, and that Mr.
it the society of Mr.
i he, Cousin George,
cross to breakfast at
f almost forced to
private room at the
1. He wanted his
er out of humour.
o be an enduring
pertinacious, and
For a moment he
tell you this. You'll be at the Old Bailey very soi
if you don't do just vat you is told to do."
“Me at the Old Bailey!”
“Yes, Captain 'Oshspur,--you at the Old Bail.
In vat vay did you get those moneys from poor i
Valker? I know vat I says. More than three hundr
pounds! It was card-sharping.”
"Who says it was card-sharping?”
“I says so, Captain 'Oshspur, and so does
Bullbean. Mr. Bullbean vill prove it.” Mr. Bullbe
was a gentleman known well to Mr. Hart, who h
made one of the little party at Mr. Walker's establis
ment, by means of which Cousin George had gor
flush of money, down among his distinguished frien
in Norfolk. “Vat did you do with poor Valke:
moneys? It vas very hard upon poor Mr. Valker,
very hard.”
“It was fair play, Mr. Hart.”
“Gammon, Captain 'Oshspur! Vere is the moneys:
“What business is that of yours?”
. “Oh, very well. Bullbean is quite ready to ?
before a magistrate,-ready at once. I don't kno
how that vill help us with our pretty cousin with a
the fortune.”
"How will it help you then?”.
“Look here, Captain 'Oshspur; I vill tell you v:
vill help me, and vill help Captain Stubber, and vi
help everybody. The young lady isn't for you at al
ut when he looked
gave him. “This
e had begun. But
is attack at once.
tell you this von't
on't do. Let me

<#PG# 189>
86
as those he wa
left him he wa
at heart also,-
to worse; he
vice and virtue
to him the va
thing by this į
life of honour
wish him to
know all about it, Captain. 'Oshspur. Mr. Boltby is
- very nice gentleman, and understands business.”
“What is Mr. Boltby to me?”
“He is a great deal to me, because he vill pay me
ny moneys, and he vill pay Captain Stubber, and vill
ay everybody. He vill pay you too, Captain 'Oshspur,
-only you must pay poor Valker his moneys. I have
romised Valker he shall have back his moneys, or
Sir Harry shall know that too. You must just give up
he young woman;—eh, Captain ’Oshspur!”
"I'm not going to be dictated to, Mr. Hart.”
“When gentlemans is in debt they must be dictated
o, or else be quoddod. We mean to have our money
rom Mr. Boltby, and that at once. Here is the offer
o pay it,-every shilling ,—and to pay you! You
nust give the lady up. You must go to Mr. Boltby,
ind write just what he tells you. If you don't-m!"
“Well, if I don't!”
"By the living God, before two weeks are over
ou shall be in prison. Bullbean saw it all. Now you
now, Captain 'Oshspur. You don't like dictating to,
lon't you? If you don't do as you're dictated to, and
hat mighty sharp, as sure as my name is Abraham
lart, everything shall come out. Every d--d thing,
aptain 'Oshspur! And now good morning, Captain
Oshspur. You had better see Mr. Boltby to-day,
aptain ’Oshspur.”
How was a man so weighted to run for such stakes.
dwell among
much sweeter,
life which he
had been his
had he actuall-
there not bee
spirit, and a s
his palate had
reform? And
brought withi
pleasant in al
all the wealth
by his side,
rendering it
them to himse
occurred to !
would have d
But thing
that he must

<#PG# 190>
'UR
spur. Mr. Boltby is
stands business."
cause he vill pay me
ain Stubber, and vill
00, Captain 'Oshspur,
his moneys. I have
back his moneys, or
'ou must just give up
Oshspur!"
to, Mr. Hart."
hey must be dictated
to have our money
e. Here is the offer
as those he was striving to carry off? When Mr.
left him he was not only sick in the stomach, but
at heart also,-sick all over. He had gone from
to worse; he had lost the knowledge of the flavou
vice and virtue; and yet now, when there was pre
to him the vanishing possibility of redeeming er
thing by this great marriage, it seemed to him th
life of honourable ease--such a life as Sir Harry wa
wish him to live if permitted to marry the girl
dwell among his friends at Humblethwaite—woulo
much sweeter, much more to his real taste, than
life which he had led for the last ten years. W
had been his positive delights? In what mom
had he actually enjoyed them? From first to last
there not been trouble and danger and vexatior
spirit, and a savour of dirt about it all, which ever
his palate had been nauseous? Would he not willir
reform? And yet, when the prospect of reform
brought within reach of his eyes, of a reform
pleasant in all its accompaniments, of reform am
all the wealth of Humblethwaite, with Emily Hots
by his side, there came these harpies down upon i
rendering it all impossible. Thrice, in speaking
them to himself, he called them harpies; but it ne
occurred to him to think by what name Mr. Wal
would have designated him...
But things around him were becoming so seri
that he must do something. It might be that
to pay you! You
Et go to Mr. Boltby,
f you don't--!"
2 weeks are over
v it all. Now you
like dictating to,
- dictated to, and
ame is Abraham
y d--d thing,
orning, Captain
Boltby to-day,
or such stakes

<#PG# 191>
uld fall to the ground, losing everything. He
ald not understand about Bullbean. Bullbean had
his share of the plunder in regard to all that he
seen. The best part of the evening's entertain-
ent had taken place after Mr. Bullbean had retired.
- doubt, however, Mr. Bullbean might do him a
mage.
He had written to Sir Harry, refusing altogether
e offer made to him. Could he, after writing such
etter, at once go to the lawyer and accept the offer?
d must he admit to himself, finally, that it was
ogether beyond his power to win his cousin's hand?
as there no hope of that life at Humblethwaite
ich, when contemplated at a distance, had seemed
him to be so green and pleasant? And what
-uld Emily think of him? In the midst of all his
per miseries that also was a misery. He was able,
ough steeped in worthlessness, so to make for him-
f a double identity as to imagine and to personify
being who should really possess fine and manly
pirations with regard to a woman, and to look upon
nself,—his second self,--as that being; and to per-
ve with how withering a contempt such a being
-uld contemplate such another man as was in truth
e real George Hotspur, whose actual sorrows and
ubles had now become so unendurable.
Who would help him in his distress? The Altring-
ms were still in Scotland, and he knew well that,
though Lady A
Lord Altringha
to be had the
dearly intimate
whom he had
if they heard
to him that th
Who did care
cared for him
make almost a
forget his sins,
of that. Emily
means by whic
loved him, but
and mother, o
ceive even a !
who loved him
the time at wh
some three or
Hart he knock
“Well, Ge
thrive?"
He had no
He was posse
so often feel,
hardly knew e
"It does n
self gloomily i

<#PG# 192>
UR
ig everything. He
ean. Bullbean had
egard to all that he
evening's entertain-
ullbean had retired.
2 might do him a
refusing altogether
after writing such
ad accept the offer?
inally, that it was
his cousin's hand?
at Humblethwaite
ance, had seemed
sant? And what
e midst of all his
y. He was able,
co make for him-
and to personify
fine and manly
nd to look upon
ng; and to per-
- such a being
as was in truth
sorrows and
e.
The Altring-
ew well that,
though Lady Altringham was fond of him, and tho
Lord Altringham fiked him, there was no assista
to be had there of the kind that he needed.
dearly intimate distinguished friends in Norfolk,
whom he had been always “George,” would not <
if they heard that he had been crucified. It seer
to him that the world was very hard and very cr
Who did care for him? There were two women v
cared for him, who really loved him, who wo
make almost any sacrifice for him, who would e
forget his sins, or at least forgive them. He was s
of that. Emily Hotspur loved him, but there were
means by which he could reach Emily Hotspur.
loved him, but she would not so far disobey her fat
and mother, or depart from her own word, as to
ceive even a letter from him. But the other frie
who loved him,-he still could see her. He knew
the time at which he would find her at home , a
some three or four hours after his interview with 1
Hart he knocked at Mrs. Morton's door.
“Well, George," she said, “how does your wooi
thrive?"
He had no preconceived plan in coming to h
He was possessed by that desire, which we all of
so often feel, to be comforted by sympathy; but
hardly knew even how to describe the want of it.
“It does not thrive at all,” he said, throwing hi
self gloomily into an easy chair.

<#PG# 193>
“That is bad news. Has the lady turned against
17"
“Oh no," said he, moodily,~“nothing of that
"Other me
He is sending
"Not only
you know that
me?"
“That would be impossible, would it not? Fathers
storn, but to such a one as you daughters are
vays kind. That is what you mean; eh, George?”
"I wish you would not chaff me, Lucy. I am not
ill, and I did not come to be chaffed.”
"The chaffing is all to be on one side, is it,
porgo? Well; I will say nothing to add to your
scomforts. What is it ails you? You will drink
queurs after dinner. That is what makes you so
cotched. And I believe you drink them before dinner
“No!”
“But he d
and talked to
before, certain
how handsome!
“Yes; he is
“So like you
"Is he?"
"Only you
**Hardly ever. I don't do such a thing three times
- a month. It is not that; but things do trouble
e so."
"I suppose Sir Harry is not well pleased.”
"Ple is doing what he ought not to do, I must say
il quite what I call ungentlemanlike. A lawyer
would never be allowed to interfere between gentle
*II wonder who would stand it, if an attorney
st to work to make all manner of inquiries
2 everything that he had ever done?"
"Ipurdi . cytainly. I should care in at once,
stres dyrs car."
say?-_less g
"I know wł
as I am."
"You're no
you are weak.
him?" - -
“Very like
“Then she
"Handsomt
George, quite
which he had
e
Morton.
She smilec
blunder. She

<#PG# 194>
ne doing s
against
"Other men have been as bad as I have, I suppo
He is sending about everywhere."
“Not only sending, George, but going himself. :
you know that Sir Harry did me the honour of visiti
,"nothing of that
me?"
vuld it not? Fathers
you daughters are
can; eh, George?”
e, Lucy. I am not
affed."
on one side, is it,
ng to add to your
? You will drink
hat makes you so
them before dizer
a thing tire comes
things deze
“No!”
“But he did. He sat there in that very cha
and talked to me in a manner that nobody ever ·
before, certainly. What a fine old man he is, a
how handsome!”
“Yes; he is a good-looking old fellow.”
“So like you, George.”
“Is he?"
“Only you know, less,-less,-less, what shal
say?-_-less good-naturęd, perhaps.”
“I know what you mean. He is not such a fc
as I am.”
“You're not a fool at all, George; but sometim
you are weak. He looks to be strong. Is she li
him?” -
“Very like him.”
“Then she must be handsome.”
“Handsome; I should think she is too!” sa
George, quite forgetting the description of his cous:
which he had given some days previously to Mi
Morton.
She smiled, but took no notice aloud of h
blunder. She knew him so well that she understoo
please."
!ms 13

<#PG# 195>
92
; all. “Yes,” she went on; "he came here and said
ome bitter things. He said more, perhaps, than he
ught to have done."
“About me, Lucy?”
“I think that he spoke chiefly about myself. There
vas a little explanation, and then he behaved very
vell. I have no quarrel with him myself. He is a fine
ld gentleman; and having one only daughter, and a
arge fortune, I do not wonder that he should want to
nake inquiries before he gives her to you.”
“He could do that without an attorney."
“Would you tell him the truth? The fact is, George,
hat you are not the sort of son-in-law that fathers like.
suppose it will be off; eh, George?” George made
no immediate reply. “It is not likely that she should
have the constancy to stick to it for years, and I am
sure you will not. Has he offered you money?” Then
George told her almost with accuracy the nature of
che proposition made to him.
“It is very generous,” she said.
“I don't see much of that.”
“It certainly is very generous.”
“What ought a fellow to do?”
“Only fancy, that you should come to me to ask
me such a question!”
“I know you will tell me true.”'
“Do you love her?”
“Yes.”
“With all you
“What is the
“Better than
“Much better
"Then stick
you don't. Im
what you say, !
beaten, certainly
were you so ma
such people. Bu
Sir Harry's offer,
how it is best for
He paused a
other question: -
Lucy?"
She smiled
if you make up
you, I will write
say to her."
Sir Harry Hotspur

<#PG# 196>
SPUR
19
2 came here and said
re, perbaps, than he
- about myself. There
len he behaved very
myself. He is a fine
only daughter, and a
at he should want to
r to you."
attorney."
> The fact is, George,
2-law that fathers like
ge?” George made
kely that she should
for years, and I am
“With all your heart?”
“Wbat is the meaning of that? I do love her.”
“Better than her father's money?”
“Much better."
“Then stick to her through thick and thin. Bu
you don't. I must not advise you in accordance wit
what you say, but with what I think. You will b
beaten, certainly. She will never be your wife; an
were you so married, you would not be happy wit
such people. But she will never be your wife. Tak
Sin Harry's offer, and write to her a letter, explainin
how it is best for all that you should do so.”
He paused a moment, and then he asked her on
other question: "Would you write the letter for me
Lucy?”
She smiled again as she answered him: “Yes
if you make up your mind to do as Sir Harry asks
you, I will write a draft of what I think you should
say to her.”
you money?” Then
aracy the nature of
me to me to ask
Sir Harry Hotspur.
13

<#PG# 197>
94
CHAPTER XVI.
Sir Harry's Return.
SIR HARRY received the grandly worded and in-
dignant letter which had been written at the club,
and Cousin George hesitated as to that other letter
which his friend was to dictate for him. Conse-
quently it became necessary that Sir Harry should
leave London before the matter was settled. In
truth the old Baronet liked the grandly worded and
Endignant letter. It was almost such a letter as a
Hotspur should write on such an occasion. There
was an admission of pecuniary weakness which did
not quite become a Hotspur, but otherwise the letter
was a good letter. Before he left London he took the
letter with him to Mr. Boltby, and on his way thither
could not refrain from counting up all the good things
which would befall him and his if only this young
man might be reclaimed and recast in a mould such
as should fit the heir of the Hotspurs. He had been
very bad, --so bad that when Sir Harry counted up
his sins they seemed to be as black as night. And
then, as he thought of them, the father would declare
to himself that he would not imperil his daughter by
trusting her to one who had shown himself to be so
evil. But agair
would come up
George had bee:
ful to Sir Harry;
like vice. He ha
but a professior
into debt, but I
was fraudulent;-
yet, need it be
the reach of all
done as bad, a
pale of decent 1
mind Sir Harry
not vacillate at a
merely smiled.
“I don't thir
“Words mea
"and come so c
Sir Harry tu
frowned; he di
confidential law
sciously he was
Hotspur had bee
underlying all
there must be a
lawyer perhaps
his client was d

<#PG# 198>
SPUR
VI.
ndly worded and in-
written at the club,
s to that other letter
e for him. Conse-
at Sir Harry should
er was settled. In
grandly worded and
such a letter as a
in occasion. There
weakness which did
: otherwise the letter
London he took the
i on his way thither
) all the good things
if only this young
evil. But again another mode of looking at it, a
would come upon him. The kind of vice of whic
George had been undoubtedly guilty was very distasti
ful to Sir Harry; it had been ignoble and ungentlemai
like vice. He had been a liar, and not only a gamble
but a professional gambler. He had not simply go
into debt, but he had got into debt in a fashion tha
was fraudulent;—so at least Sir Harry thought. An
yet, need it be said that this reprobate was beyon
the reach of all forgiveness? Had not men before hir
done as bad, and yet were brought back within th
pale of decent life? In this still vacillating mood a
mind Sir Harry reached his lawyer's. Mr. Boltby di
not vacillate at all. When he was shown the letter h
merely smiled.
“I don't think it is a bad letter,” said Sir Harry.
“Words mean so little, Sir Harry,” said Mr. Boltby
“and come so cheap."
Sir Harry turned the letter over in his hand an
frowned; he did not quite like to be told even by hi
confidential lawyer that he was mistaken. Uncon
sciously he was telling himself that after all Georg
Hotspur had been born a gentleman, and that therefore
underlying all the young man's vileness and villan
there must be a substratum of noble soil of which th
lawyer perhaps knew nothing. Mr. Boltby saw tha
his client was doubting, and having given much troubl.
ast in a mould such
purs. He had been
· Harry counted op
ick as night. And
ather would declare
ril his daughter by
n himself to be so
13*

<#PG# 199>
96
o the matter, and not being afraid of Sir Harry, he
determined to speak his mind freely:
“Sir Harry,” he said, “in this matter I must tell
you what I really think.”
“Certainly."
“I am sorry to have to speak ill of one bearing
your name; and were not the matter urgent' as it is,
I should probably repress something of my opinion.
As it is, I do not dare to do so. You could not in
all London find a man less fit to be the husband of
Miss Hotspur than her cousin."
“He is a gentleman-by birth,” said Sir Harry.
“He is an unprincipled blackguard by education,
and the more blackguard because of his birth; there is
nothing too bad for him to do, and very little so bad
but what he has done it. He is a gambler, a swindler,
and, as I believe, a forger and a card-sharper. He has
lived upon the wages of the woman he has professed
to love. He has shown himself to be utterly spiritless,
abominable, and vile. If my clerk in the next room
were to slap his face, I do not believe that he would
resent it.” Sir Harry frowned, and moved his feet
rapidly on the floor. “In my thorough respect and
regard for you, Sir Harry,” continued Mr. Boltby,
“I have undertaken a work which I would not have
done for above two or three other men in the world
beside yourself. I am bound to tell you the result,
which is this, – that I would sooner give my own
girl to the swe
Hotspur."
Sir Harry's
not quite knor
had less powe
thought in reg
affairs. “Of co
to you, Mr. Boi
“I only hop
"It has bee
in regard to th
say. He has re
-honourably."
"It means
" How noth
“No man
playing his ha:
knows that he
It was not to
once. In bes
starve the gari
in. When at
as will now se
long. I shall i
over."
"You thin
thwaite."
"Certainly,

<#PG# 200>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
OTSPUR
afraid of Sir Harry, he
freely:
! this matter I must tell
peak ill of one bearing
matter urgent as it is
ething of my opinion.
so. You could not in
to be the husband of
th," said Sir Harry.
ckguard by education,
ce of his birth; there is
and very little so bad
a gambler, a swindler,
card-sharper. He has
man he has professed
o be utterly spiritless,
erk in the next room
believe that he would
and moved his feet
horough respect and
ntinued Mr. Boltby,
h I would not have
er men in the world
tell you the result,
oner give my own
girl to the sweeper at the crossing than to Geor
Hotspur." Forte
Sir Harry's brow was very black. Perhaps he hi
not quite known his lawyer. Perhaps it was that
had less power of endurance than he had hims
thought in regard to the mention of his own fami
affairs. “Of course,” he said, “I am greatly indebte
to you, Mr. Boltby, for the trouble you have taken.”
“I only hope it may be of service to you."
“It has been of service. What may be the rest
in regard to this unfortunate young man I cannot y
say. He has refused our offer, I must say as I thir
-honourably.”
"It means nothing.”
“How nothing, Mr. Boltby?”
“No man accepts such a bargain at first. He
playing his hand against yours, Sir Harry, and I
knows that he has got a very good card in his ow
It was not to be supposed that he would give in
once. In besieging a town the surest way is
starve the garrison. Wait a while and he will gi-
in. When a town has within its walls such vultur
as will now settle upon him, it cannot stand out ve
long. I shall hear more of him before many days a
over.”
“You think, then, that I may return to Humbl
thwaite.”
“Certainly, Sir Harry; but I hope, Sir Harry, th

<#PG# 201>
98
that as the resu
yield. He knew
was thoroughly a
believed, an irr
of what might h
Things wer
Humblethwaite.
from questions.
as can be.”
ou will return with the settled conviction on your
nind that this young man must not on any considera-
con be allowed to enter your family."
The lawyer meant well, but he overdid his work.
Sir Harry got up and shook hands with him and
-hanked him, but left the room with some sense of
Offence. He had come to Mr. Boltby for information,
and he had received it. But he was not quite sure
Chat he had intended that Mr. Boltby should advise
enim touching his management of his own daughter.
Mr. Boltby, he thought, had gone a little beyond his
Eether. Sir Harry acknowledged to himself that he
had learned a great deal about his cousin, and it was
for him to judge after that whether he would receive
his cousin at Humblethwaite. Mr. Boltby should not
have spoken about the crossing-sweeper. And then
Sir Harry was not quite sure that he liked that idea of
setting vultures upon a man; and Sir Harry remembered
something of his old lore as a hunting man. It is
astonishing what blood will do in bringing a horse
through mud at the end of a long day. Mr. Boltby
probably did not understand how much, at the very
last, might be expected from breeding. When Sir
Harry leſt Mr. Boltby's chambers he was almost better-
minded towards Cousin "George than he had been
when he entered them; and in this frame of mind,
both for and against the young man, he returned to
Humblethwaite. It must not be supposed, however,
"He has gar
“Gambled!
ask about it; he
“Then there
“No hope!
her life need
whom after all
must get over
same."
"She is not
“How not F
"I think sh
heart upon lovi
him." :
“Then she
"She will b
“She will b:
When her
and she had

<#PG# 202>
TSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
ed conviction on your
: not on any considera-
Imily.”
the overdid his work.
hands with him and
m with some sense of
Boltby for information,
he was not quite sure
Boltby should advise
of his own daughter.
one a little beyond his
i to himself that he
is cousin, and it was
ther he would receive
Ir. Boltby should not
that as the result of the whole he was prepared
yield. He knew, beyond all doubt, that his cous
was thoroughly a bad subject,—a worthless and, as :
believed, an irredeemable scamp; but yet he thoug
of what might happen if he were to yield!
Things were very sombre when he reach
Humblethwaite. Of course his wife could not refra
from questions. “It is very bad,” he said,—"as bi
as can be.”
“He has gambled?”
“Gambled! If that were all! You had better n
ask about it; he is a disgrace to the family.”
“Then there can be no hope for Emily?”
“No hope! Why should there not be hope? A
her life need not depend on her fancy for a man
whom after all she has not seen so very much. SH
must get over it. Other girls have had to do th
same.”
“She is not like other girls, Harry.”
“How not like them?"
“I think she is more persistent; she has set h
heart upon loving this young man, and she will lo-
him.”
“Then she must."
“She will break her heart,” said Lady Elizabeth.
“She will break mine, I know,” said Sir Harry.
When he met his daughter he had embraced he
and she had kissed him and asked after his welfar
sweeper. And then
he liked that idea of
Sir Harry remembered
hunting man. It is
in bringing a horse
ig day. Mr. Boltby
much, at the very
"eeding. When Sir
· was almost better-
han he had been
his frame of mind,
n, he returned to
pposed, however,

<#PG# 203>
200
but he felt at once that she was different from what
she used to be,--different, not only as regarded her-
self, but different also in her manner. There came
upon him a sad, ponderous conviction that the sun-
light had gone out from their joint lives, that all
pleasant things were over for both of them, and that,
as for him, it would be well for him that he should
die. He could not be happy if there were discord
between him and his child,--and there must be discord.
The man had been invited with a price to take him-
self off, and had not been sufficiently ignoble to accept
the offer. How could he avoid the discord, and bring
back the warmth of the sun into his house? Then he
semembered those terribly forcible epithets which Mr.
Boltby had spoken. “He is an unprincipled black-
guard; and the worse blackguard because of his birth.”
The words had made Sir Harry angry, but he believed
them to be true. If there were to be any yielding,
he would not yield as yet; but that living in his
house without sunshine was very grievous to him.
She will kill me," he said to himself, “if she goes
on like this.”
And yet it was hard to say of what it was that he
complained. Days went by and his daughter said
nothing and did nothing of which he could complain.
It was simply this,—that the sunshine was no longer
bright within his halls. Days went by, and George
lotspur's name had never been spoken by Emily in
the hearing of
there were for
of a girl in h
custom of a m
for her father 1
it to him as
with her old
simply because
be remarked.
fourth or fifth
do it for mys
the next morni
been so full o
She had certa
prolonged rat
father and
changed; her
works of religi
mentaries.
“It will ki
"I am afr
"Do you see
so little!"
“She wall
"Ves; an
church every
sure she is n
; "She has

<#PG# 204>
OTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
was different from what
ot only as regarded her
manner. There came
conviction that the sun-
r joint lives, that all
oth of them, and that,
or him that he should
if there were discord
! there must be discord.
h a price to take him-
ently ignoble to accept
the discord, and bring
his house? Then he
le epithets whích Mr.
unprincipled black-
because of his birth."
ngry, but he believed
to be any yielding,
that living in his
1 grievous to him.
mself, "if she goes
the hearing of her father or mother. Such dutie:
there were for her to do were done. The active du
of a girl in her position are very few. It was
custom of a morning to spread butter on a bit of to
for her father to eat. This she still did, and brou
it to him as was her wont; but she did not brin;
with her old manner. It was a thing still done
simply because not to do it would be an omission
be remarked. “Never mind it,” said her father
fourth or fifth morning after his return, “I'd soo
do it for myself.” She did not say a word, but
the next morning the little ceremony, which had oi
been so full of pleasant affection, was discontinu
She had certain hours of reading, and these w
prolonged rather than abandoned. But both
father and mother perceived that her books w
changed; her Italian was given up, and she took
works of religion,-sermons, treatises, and long co
mentaries.
“It will kill me,” said Sir Harry to his wife.
"I am afraid it will kill her,” said Lady Elizabe
“Do you see how her colour has gone, and she e
so little!”
“She walks every day.”
“Yes; and comes in so tired. And she goes
church every Wednesday and Friday at Hesket. ]
sure she is not fit for it such weather as this."
"She has the carriage?”
what it was that he
his daughter said
he could complain.
ine was no longer
: by, and George
oken by Emily in

<#PG# 205>
“No, she walks.”
Then Sir Harry gave orders that his daughter
ould always have the carriage on Wednesdays and
-idays. But Emily, when her mother told her this,
sisted that she would sooner walk.
But what did the carriage or no carriage on Wed-
esday signify? The trouble was deeper than that. It
as so deep that both father and mother felt that
omething must be done, or the trouble would become
po heavy for their backs. Ten days passed and nothing
as heard either from Mr. Boltby or from Cousin George.
ir Harry hardly knew what it was then he expected
hear; but it seemed that he did expect something.
He was nervous at the hour of post, and was aware
imself that he was existing on from day to day with
ne idea of soon doing some special thing,- he knew
ot what, - but something that might put an end to
ne frightful condition of estrangement between him
nd his child in which he was now living. It told
ven upon his duty among his tenants. It told upon
is farm. It told upon almost every workman in the
arish. He had no heart for doing anything. It did
ot seem certain to him that he could continue to live
his own house. He could not bring himself to order
at this wood should be cut, or that those projected
ottages should be built. Everything was at a stand-
ill; and it was clear to him that Emily knew that all
is had come from her rash love for her cousin George.
She never no
own room, 01
now asked hin
papers to dec
to allow himse
were greetings
questions were
was no conver
be punished in
If he was 1
also was his
her own mind
her father in 1
victions in thi
general convic
bestowing her:
subject to her
that she knew
had read and
with their lov
their lovers, w
their fathers'
She had som
dreadful to !
been persona
principle, wh
fast in her pr
that could be

<#PG# 206>
-TSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
ærs that his daughter
2 on Wednesdays and
mother told her this,
alk.
no carriage on Wed-
deeper than that. It
and mother felt that
crouble would become
's passed and nothing
s from Cousin George.
as then he expected
id expect something.
post, and was aware
rom day to day with
ial thing,- he knew
night put an end to
ement between him
10w living. It told
ants. It told upon
She never now came and stood at his elbow in
own room, or leaned upon his shoulder; she n
now asked him questions, or brought him out from
papers to decide questions in the garden, -or ra
to allow himself to be ruled by her decisions. T
were greetings between them morning and evening,
questions were asked and answered formally; but t]
was no conversation. “What have I done that I sho
be punished in this way?” said Sir Harry to himse
If he was prompt to think himself hardly used,
also was his daughter. In considering the matter
her own mind she had found it to be her duty to o
her father in her outward conduct, founding her
victions in this matter upon precedent and upon
general convictions of the world. In the matter
bestowing herself upon a suitor, a girl is held to
subject to her parents. So much she knew, or belie
that she knew; and therefore she would obey.
had read and heard of girls who would correspo
with their lovers clandestinely, would run away y
their lovers, would marry their lovers as it were beh
their fathers' backs. No act of this kind would she
She had something within her which would make
dreadful to her ever to have to admit that she i
been personally wrong,—some mixture of pride a
principle, which was strong enough to keep her ste
fast in her promised obedience. She would do nothi
that could be thrown in her teeth; nothing that cou
ery workman in the
g anything. It did
uld continue to live
ing himself to order
hat those projected
ng was at a stand-
mily knew that all
her cousin George

<#PG# 207>
e called unfeminine, indelicate, or undutiful. But she
ad high ideas of what was due to herself, and con-
eived that she would be wronged by her father, should
er father take advantage of her sense of duty to crush
er heart. She had her own rights and her own privi-
ges, with which grievous and cruel interference
ould be made, should her father, because he was her
ather, rob her of the only thing which was sweet to
er taste or desirable in her esteem. Because she was
Es heiress he had no right to make her his slave. But
wen should he do so, she had in her own hands a
ertain security. The bondage of a slave no doubt he
night allot to her, but not the task-work. Because
he would cling to her duty and keep the promise
-hich she had made to him, it would be in his power
prevent the marriage upon which she had set her
eart; but it was not within his power, or within his
rivilege as a father, to force upon her any other mar-
iage. She would never help him with her hand in
cat adjustment of his property of which he thought so
uch unless he would help her in her love. And in
ne meantime sunshine should be banished from the
Louse, such sunshine as had shone round her head.
She did not so esteem herself as to suppose that, be-
ause she was sad, therefore her father and mother
could be wretched; but she did feel herself bound to
contribute to the house in general all the wretchedness
which might come from her own want of sunlight.
She suffered un
was she, becau
debarred from
to risk herself,
the life and
bad as they we
the least believ
within her reac
clever, handsor
in addition to
some day be the
known well eno
Lown. Was it n
had come in b
And when she
she should clin
Her father
burden kept in
whose obedien
from one maste
her father; but
that hers was 1
a dog. She
And then the
suitors, whom
when imaginin
her own choos
and of marriak

<#PG# 208>
SPUR
or undutiful. But she
to herself, and con-
by her father, should
sense of duty to crush
ets and her own privi-
ed cruel interference
-, because he was her
which was sweet to
em. Because she was
ke her his slave. But
in her own hands a
- a slave no doubt he
task-work. Because
d keep the promise
ould be in his power
ich she had set her
power, or within his
i her any other mar-
i with her hand in
which he thought so
2 her love. And in
banished from the
She suffered under a terrible feeling of ill-usage.
was she, because she was a girl and an heiress, to
debarred from her own happiness? If she were wil
to risk herself, why should others interfere ? An
the life and conduct of her cousin were in truth
bad as they were represented,- which she did not
the least believe, — why had he been allowed to co
within her reach? It was not only that he was you
clever, handsome, and in every way attractive, but th
in addition to all this, he was a Hotspur, and wo
some day be the head of the Hotspurs. Her father h
known well enough that her family pride wası equal to
own. Was it not natural that, when a man so endow
had come in her way, she should learn to love hii
And when she had loved him, was it not right th
she should cling to her love?
Her father would fain treat her like a beast
burden kept in the stables for a purpose; or like a d
whose obedience and affections might be transferr
from one master to another for a price. She would ob
her father; but her father should be made to understa
that hers was not the nature of a beast of burden or
a dog. She was a Hotspur as thoroughly as was
And then they brought men there to her, select
suitors, whom she despised. What did they think of
when imagining that she would take a husband not
her own choosing? What must be their idea of lo
and of marriage duty, and of that close intercourse
de round her head.
o suppose that, be
father and mother
el herself bound to
all the wretchedness
want of sunlight.

<#PG# 209>
26
of the father o
face, and are
we cast back a
And so the
of Humblethwa
night.
an and wife? To her feeling a woman should not
arry at all unless she could so love a man as to
knowledge to herself that she was imperatively re-
uired to sacrifice all that belonged to her for his wel-
tre and good. Such was her love for George Hotspur,
- let him be what he might. They told her that he
as bad and that he would drag her into the mud.
he was willing to be dragged into the mud; or, at
ny rate, to make her own struggle during the dragging,
s to whether he should drag her in, or she should
rag him out.
And then they brought men to her-walking-sticks,
-Lord Alfred and young Mr. Thoresby, and insulted
er by supposing of her that she would marry a man
Emply because he was brought there as a fitting hus-
and. She would be dutiful and obedient as a daugh-
er, according to her idea of duty and of principle;
ut she would let them know that she had an identity
f her own, and that she was not to be moulded like
- piece of clay. .
No doubt she was hard upon her father. No doubt
he was in very truth disobedient and disrespectful. It
was not that she should have married any Lord Alfred
hat was brought to her, but that she should have
truggled to accommodate her spirit to her father's
pirit. But she was a Hotspur; and though she could be
enerous, she could not yield. And then the hold of
child upon the father is so much stronger than that

<#PG# 210>
SPUR
a woman should not
so love a man as to
was imperatively re-
ed to her for his wel-
e for George Hotspur,
They told her that he
ng her into the mud.
to the mud; or, at
- during the dragging,
er in, or she should
of the father on the child! Our eyes are set in
face, and are always turned forward. The glances
we cast back are but occasional.
And so the sunshine was banished from the ho
of Humblethwaite, and the days were as black as
night.
her—walking-sticks,
coresby, and insulted
would marry a man
here as a fitting hus-
obedient as a daugh-
aty and of principle;
she had an identity
to be moulded like
her father. No doubt
and disrespectful. It
ied any Lord Alfred
at she should have
virit to her father's
though she could be
ad then the hold of
stronger than that

<#PG# 211>
with her till all
was so much 1
was his all in
He was the har
never be forced
CHAPTER XVII.
"Let us Try.”
"Emily," he
are so changed
"Papa!"
THINGS went on thus at Humblethwaite for three
eeks, and Sir Harry began to feel that he could
adure it no longer. He had expected to have heard
gain from Mr. Boltby, but no letter had come. Mr.
oltby had suggested to him something of starving
at the town, and he had expected to be informed
efore this whether the town were starved out or not.
Ie had received an indignant and grandiloquent letter
com his cousin, of which as yet he had taken no no-
ce. He had taken no notice of the letter, although
- had been written to decline a proposal of very great
moment made by himself. He felt that in these cir-
umstances Mr. Boltby ought to have written to him.
de ought to have been told what was being done. And
et he had left Mr. Boltby with a feeling which made
- distasteful to him to ask further questions from the
awyer on the subject. Altogether his position was one
3 disagreeable and painful as it well could be.
But at last, in regard to his own private life with
Es daughter, he could bear it no longer. The tender-
ess of his heart was too much for his pride, and he
roke down in his resolution to be stern and silent
" Are you n.
everything about
“Yes, Papa."
"And why is
You used to con
near me now."
She hesitate
to the ground,
looked him full
ways thinking of
“But why sh
that it were not s
"Because yo
so differently!
“I do not hi
hate his vices."
“So do I."
"I know that
I have not beei
know of him."
Sir Harry Hotspur.

<#PG# 212>
PUR
ablethwaite for three
feel that he could
pected to have heard
ter had come. Mr.
omething of starving
cted to be informed
e starved out or not.
I grandiloquent letter
he had taken no no-
the letter, although
roposal of very great
It that in these cir-
have written to him.
as being done. And
feeling which made
with her till all this should have passed by them.
was so much more to him than he was to her!
was his all in all;—whereas Cousin George was he
He was the happier at any rate in this, that he wou
never be forced to despise where he loved.
“Emily,” he said to her at last, "why is it that y
are so changed to me?”
“Papa!”
“Are you not changed? Do you not know th
everything about the house is changed?”
“Yes, Papa."
“And why is it so? I do not keep away from you
You used to come to me every day. You never com
near me now."
She hesitated for a moment with her eyes turne
to the ground, and then as she answered him sh
looked him full in the face. “It is because I am a.
ways thinking of my cousin George.”
“But why should that keep us apart, Emily? I wis
that it were not so; but why should that keep us apart?
“Because you are thinking of him too, and thin
so differently! You hate him; but I love him."
“I do not hate him. It is not that I hate him.
trate his vices.”
“So do I.”
“I know that he is not a fit man for you to marr
I have not been able to tell you the things that
know of him."
Sir Harry Hotspur.
questions from the
zis position was one
ell could be.
wn private life with
onger. The tender-
[ his pride, and he
De stern and silent

<#PG# 213>
10
“I do not wish to be told.”
"But you might believe me when I assure you that
ney are of a nature to make you change your feelings
wards him. At this very moment he is attached
0-to-another person."
Emily Hotspur blushed up to her brows, and her
Cheeks and forehead were suffused with blood; but
her mouth was set as firm as a rock, and then came
that curl over her eye which her father had so dearly
loved when she was a child, but which was now held
by him to be so dangerous. She was not going to be
talked out of her love in that way. Of course there
had been things, - were things of which she knew
nothing and desired to know nothing. Though she
herself was as pure as the driven snow, she did not
require to be told that there were impurities in the
world. If it was meant to be insinuated that he was
untrue to her, she simply disbelieved it. But what if
he were? His untruth would not justify hers. And
untruth was impossible to her. She loved him, and
had told him so. Let him be ever so false, it was for
her to bring him back to truth or to spend herself in
the endeavour. Her father did not understand her at
all when he talked to her after this fashion. But she
said nothing. Her father was alluding to a matter on
which she could say nothing.
"If I could explain to you the way in which he has
raised money f
he had degrade
“He canno
not now. It is
"But, Emil
you set your a
wrongly, on hd
and I ought to
$0 set?"
“He is your
"No; you ar
that. Grant tha
acre that is mine
very moment tha
giving my child
are no more to I
empty title? The
"Papa!"
"I do not t
darling, I have
anxieties have c
to know what it
you think that I
as to wealth o1
come to that wit
ma now;-nothi
"Dear Papa!
his shoulder.

<#PG# 214>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
TSPUR
when I assure you that
u change your feelings
oment he is attached
her brows, and her
used with blood; but
rock, and then came
r father had so dearly
t which was now held
e was not going to be
vay. Of course there
of which she knew
nothing. Though she
'n snow, she did not
ere impurities in the
asinuated that he was
eved it. But what if
raised money for his daily needs, you would feel th:
he had degraded himself beneath your notice.”
“He cannot degrade himself beneath my notice;-
not now. It is too late.”
“But, Emily,—do you mean to say then that, la
you set your affections where you might,- howeve
wrongly, on however base a subject, -your mamm
and I ought to yield to them, merely because they ar
so set?”
“He is your heir, Papa.”
“No; you are my heir. But I will not argue upo:
that. Grant that he were my heir; even though ever
acre that is mine must go to feed his wickedness th
very moment that I die, would that be a reason fo
giving my child to him also ? Do you think that you
are no more to me than the acres, or the house, or th
empty title? They are all nothing to my love for you.
“Papa!”
“I do not think that you have known it. Nay
darling, I have hardly known it myself. All othe
anxieties have ceased with me now that I have com
to know what it really is to be anxious for you. Do
you think that I would not abandon any consideration
as to wealth or family for your happiness? It ha
come to that with me, Emily, that they are nothing to
ma now;--nothing. You are everything.”
"Dear Papa!” And now once again she leant upon
his shoulder.
ot justify hers. And
She loved him, and
er so false, it was for
r to spend herself in
.ot understand her at
his fashion. But she
iding to a matter on
way in which he has

<#PG# 215>
212
“When I tell you of the young man's life, you will
not listen to me. You regard it simply as groundless
opposition.”
“No, Papa; not groundless, only useless."
“But am I not bound to see that my girl be not
united to a man who would disgrace her, misuse her,
drag her into the dirt,”--that idea of dragging George
out was strong in Emily's mind as she listened to
this, --“make her wretched and contemptible, and
degrade her? Surely this is a father's duty; and my
child should not turn from me, and almost refuse to
speak to me, because I do it as best I can!”
“I do not turn from you, Papa."
“Has my darling been to me as she used to be?”
“Look here, Papa; you know what it is I have
promised you."
“I do, dearest."
“I will keep my promise. I will never marry him
till you consent. Even though I were to see him every
day for ten years, I would not do so when I had given
my word."
“I am sure of it, Emily."
“But let us try, you and I and Mamma together,
If you will do that; oh, I will be so good to you!
Let us see if we cannot make him good. I will never
ask to marry him till you yourself are satisfied that
he has reformed.” She looked into his face implor-
ingly, and she saw that he was vacillating. And yet
he was a strong
much doubt.
and be friends.
can trust any of
"I do trust
"I shall nev
"Do not sa
to know your
time will cure.
suffering, and
mothers.”
"Papa, I sh
more because he
is a cripple, he
strong. I shall
I know it is m
without your co
to marry any o
You will agree 1
"I should
you.”
"That is wh
each other. No
him, and to lov
as I live I shal
about him will
go on finding
good, and then

<#PG# 216>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
TSPUR
ung man's life, you will
it simply as groundless
-only useless."
ze that my girl be not
grace her, misuse her,
Bea of dragging George
and as she listened to
nd contemptible, and
father's duty; and my
and almost refuse to
best I can!"
he was a strong man, not given in ordinary things
much doubt. “Papa, let us understand each oth-
and be friends. If we do not trust each other, w.
can trust any one?”.
“I do trust you."
“I shall never care for any one else.”
“Do not say that, my child. You are too your
to know your own heart. These are wounds whic
time will cure. Others have suffered as you a
suffering, and yet have become happy wives an
mothers.”
“Papa, I shall never change. I think I love his
more because he is—so weak. Like a poor child the
is a cripple, he wants more love than those who ar
strong. I shall never change. And look here, Papa
I know it is my duty to obey you by not marryin
without your consent. But it can never be my dut
to marry any one because you or Mamma ask me
You will agree to that, Papa?”
“I should never think of pressing any one oi
zpa.”
e as she used to be?"
now what it is I have
: will never marry him
were to see him every
o so when I had given
you.”
ind Mamma together.
be so good to you!
m good. I will never
self are satisfied that
into his face implor-
vacillating. And yet
“That is what I mean. And so we do understand
each other. Nothing can teach me not to think o
him, and to love him, and to pray for him. As long
as I live I shall do so. Nothing you can find ou
about him will alter me in that. Pray, pray do no
go on finding out bad things. Find out something
good, and then you will begin to love him.”

<#PG# 217>
214
“But if there is nothing good?” Sir Harry, as he
said this, remembered the indignant refusal of his
offer which was at that moment in his pocket, and
confessed to himself that he had no right to say that
nothing good could be found in Cousin George.
“Do not say that, Papa. How can you say that
of any one? Remember, he has our name, and he
must some day be at the head of our family."
“It will not be long, first,” said Sir Harry, mourn-
fully.
“Many, many, many years, I hope. For his sake
as well as ours, I pray that it may be so. But still it
is natural to suppose that the day will come.”
"Of course it will come.”
“Must it not be right, then, to make him fit for it
when it comes? It can't be your great duty to think
of him, as it is mine; but still it must be a duty to
you too. I will not excuse his life, Papa; but have
there not been temptations,—such great temptations?
And then, other men are excused for doing what he
has done. Let us try together, Papa. Say that you
will try.”
It was clear to Sir Harry through it all that she
knew nothing as yet of the nature of the man's
offences. When she spoke of temptation not resisted,
she was still thinking of commonplace extravagance,
of the ordinary pleasures of fast young men, of race-
courses, and !
That lie which
as it were, thr
be forced to lo
be steeped in
tradesmen on
victims, a cre:
woman's money
a card-sharper,
was inclined at
Mr. Boltby, haq
And this was
pleading with a
1-was pleading
he might at la
lover, her hus!
from all the w
things of which
so foul in the
stain to be in
whom he as a
in order that
become the re
"Papa, say
clinging to him
He could
yet he longed

<#PG# 218>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
OTSPUR
ood?” Sir Harry, as he
ndignant refusal of his
.ent in his pocket, and
nad no right to say that
in Cousin George.
How can you say that
has our name, and he
of our family.”
said Sir Harry, mourn
I hope. For his sake
may be so. But still it
ay will come."
courses, and betting, perhaps, and of tailors' b
That lie which he had told about Goodwood she h
as it were, thrown behind her, so that she should
be forced to look at it. But Sir Harry knew him
be steeped in dirty lies up to the hip, one who chea
tradesmen on system, a gambler who looked out
victims, a creature so mean that he could take
woman's money! Mr. Boltby had called him a swindl
a card-sharper, and a cur; and Sir Harry, though
was inclined at the present moment to be angry w
Mr. Boltby, had never known the lawyer to be wroi
And this was the man for whom his daughter v
pleading with all the young enthusiasm of her natu
---was pleading, not as for a cousin, but in order tł
he might at last be welcomed to that house as !
lover, her husband, the one human being chosen
from all the world to be the recipient of the go
things of which she had the bestowal! The man w
so foul in the estimation of Sir Harry that it was
stain to be in his presence; and this was the m
whom he as a father was implored to help to say
in order that at some future time his daughter mig
become the reprobate's wife!
"Papa, say that you will help me,” repeated Emil
clinging to him, and looking up into his face.
He could not say that he would help her, ar
yet he longed to say some word that might comfc
, to make him fit for it
vur great duty to think
I it must be a duty to
; life, Papa; but have
ich great temptations?
sed for doing what he
, Papa. Say that you
hrough it all that she
nature of the man's
·mptation not resisted,
onplace extravagance,
young men, of race-

<#PG# 219>
16
er. “You have been greatly shaken by all this,
Hearest."
“Shaken! Yes, in one sense I have been shaken.
don't know quite what you mean. I shall never be
haken in the other way.”
"You have been distressed.”
“Yes; distressed."
“And, indeed, so have we all," he continued. "I
think it will be best to leave this for a while."
“For how long, Papa?”
“We need not quite fix that. I was thinking of
going to Naples for the winter.” He was silent, wait-
ng for her approbation, but she expressed none. “It
s not long since you said how much you would like
o spend a winter in Naples.”
She still paused, but it was but for a moment.
“At that time, Papa, I was not engaged.” Did she
nean to tell him, that because of this fatal promise
vhich she had made, she never meant to stir from her
lome till she should be allowed to go with that wretch
s her husband; that because of this promise, which
ould never be fulfilled, everything should come to an
nd with her? “Papa,” she said, “that would not be
he way to try to save him, to go away and leave him
mong those who prey upon him;—unless, indeed, he
light go too!”
“What! wi
“With you
what I have pr
"It is a thi
said; and then
could take her
in her present
into that cold
which had beei
a great reques
refused it. Bi
distasteful did
pitch and not !
was so very bla
soothe her. I
should not acc
demand it of h
self, and com
might it not be
Emily should I
half promise s
not that soften
abroad with a
pleasure? If
might do the
him to see hi
his own home
now he would

<#PG# 220>
SPUR
shaken by all this,
e I have been shaken.
ean. I shall never be
1,” he continued. "I
for a while."
· I was thinking of
He was silent, wait-hi.
expressed none. “It
much you would like
“What! with us?"
“With you and Mamma. Why not? You kr
what I have promised. You can trust me."
“It is a thing absolutely not to be thought of,”
said; and then he left her. What was he to do?
could take her abroad, no doubt, but were he to do
in her present humour, she would, of course, relaj
into that cold, silent, unloving, undutiful obedier
which had been so distressing to him. She had ma
a great request to him, and he had not absolut
refused it. But the more he thought of it the mo
distasteful did it become to him. You cannot tou
pitch and not be defiled. And the stain of this pit
was so very black! He could pay money, if that wou
soothe her. He could pay money, even if the mi
should not accept the offer made to him, should s
demand it of him. And if the man would reform hii
self, and come out through the fire really purifie
might it not be possible that at some long future tin
Emily should become his wife? Or, if some sort
half promise such as this were made to Emily, wou
not that soften her for the time, and induce her to Ę
abroad with a spirit capable of satisfaction, if not
pleasure? If this could be brought about, then tin
might do the rest. It would have been a delight 1
him to see his daughter married early, even thoug
his own home might have been made desolate; bu
now he would be content if he thought he could loo
but for a moment.
engaged.” Did she
of this fatal promise
.eant to stir from her
go with that wretch
this promise, which
; should come to an
" that would not be
away and leave him
--unless, indeed, he

<#PG# 221>
dearest, no;
stance, thou
angels ;-but
to know that
inestimable
ceptance.
ward to some future settlement in life that might
come her rank and fortune.
Emily, when her father left her, was aware that she
d received no reply to her request, which she was
titled to regard as encouraging; but she thought that
Le had broken the ice, and that her father would by
egrees become accustomed to her plan. If she could
mly get him to say that he would watch over the un-
appy one, she herself would not be unhappy. It was
ot to be expected that she should be allowed to give
er own aid at first to the work, but she had her
cheme. His debts must be paid, and an income
rovided for him. And duties, too, must be given to
Lim. Why should he not live at Scarrowby, and
nanage the property there? And then, at length, he
would be welcomed to Humblethwaite, when her own
vork might begin. Neither for him nor for her must
here be any living again in London until this task
should have been completed. That any trouble could
De too great, any outlay of money too vast for so
livine a purpose, did not occur to her. Was not this
man the heir to her father's title; and was he not the
owner of her own heart? Then she knelt down and
prayed that the Almighty Father would accomplish this
good work for her;—and yet, not for her, but for him;
not that she might be happy in her love, but that he
might be as a brand saved from the burning, not only
hereafter, but here also, in the sight of men. Alas,

<#PG# 222>
PUR
nt in life that might
dearest, no; not so could it be done! Not at ti
stance, though thy prayers be as pure as the son
angels;—but certainly at his, if only he could be ta
to know that the treasure so desirable in thy sigh
inestimable to thee, were a boon worthy of his
ceptance.
er, was aware that she
quest, which she was
; but she thought that
it her father would by
er plan. If she could
d watch over the un-
; be unhappy. It was
ld be allowed to give
rk, but she had her
said, and an income
too, must be given to
e at Scarrowby, and
d then, at length, he
waite, when her own
him nor for her must
ondon until this task
Chat any trouble could
oney too vast for so
to her. Was not this
; and was he not the
she knelt down and
vould accomplish this
: for her, but for him;
her love, but that he '
he burning, not only
sight of men. Alas,

<#PG# 223>
thought of a
rowby comb
been sure th
further drive
in London o
CHAPTER XVIII.
Good Advice.
Two or three days after the little request made by
usin George to Mrs. Morton, the Altringhams came
Adenly to town. George received a note from Lady
tringham addressed to him at his club.
“We are going through to the Draytons in Hamp-
ire. It is a new freak. Four or five horses are to
- sold, and Gustavus thinks of buying the lot. If
u are in town, come to us. You must not think
at we are slack about you because Gustavus would
we nothing to do with the money. He will be at
me to-morrow till eleven. I shall not go out tili
0. We leave on Thursday.-Yours, A. A.”
This letter he received on the Wednesday. Up to
at hour he had done nothing since his interview
th Mr. Hart; nor during those few days did he hear
om that gentleman, or from Captain Stubber, or from
r. Boltby. He had written to Sir Harry refusing Sir
arry's generous offer, and subsequently to that had
ade up his mind to accept it,--and had asked, as
reader knows, for Mrs. Morton's assistance. But
e making up of George Hotspur's mind was nothing.
was unmade again that day after dinner, as he
He went
wishing to se
of seeing as
possible. He
wife's morning
do things go
humour, and
"I must be of
may be sure t1
you or I.” T
his usual frien
meant very litt
With Lady
was in earnes
real moment
of her own
badly as did
that kind. G
interesting to
very soon in
finding out he
would lie; bu

<#PG# 224>
DISPUR
thought of all the glories of Humblethwaite and S
rowby combined. Any one knowing him would I
been sure that he would do nothing till he should
further driven. Now there had come upon the sc
in London one who could drive him.
VIII.
little request made by
the Altringhams came
ed a note from Lady
Iris club.
e Draytons in Hamp-
or five horses are to
I buying the lot. If
You must not think
ause Gustavus would
ney. He will be at
shall not go out til
ours, A. A."
Wednesday. Up to
since his interview
ew days did he bear
ein Stubber, or from
r Harry refusing Sir
He went to the Earl's house just at eleven,
wishing to seem to avoid the Earl, but still desii
of seeing as little of his friend on that occasior.
possible. He found Lord Altringham standing in
wife's morning-room. "How are you, old fellow? I
do things go with the heiress?” He was in excel
humour, and said nothing about the refused requ
“I must be off. You do what my Lady advises;
may be sure that she knows a deal more about it t
you or I.” Then he went, wishing George success
his usual friendly, genial way, which, as George kn
meant very little.
With Lady Altringham the case was different.,
was in earnest about it. It was to her a matter
real moment that this great heiress should marry
of her own set, and a man who wanted money
badly as did poor George. And she liked work
that kind. George's matrimonial prospects were m
interesting to her than her husband's stables. She
very soon in the thick of it all, asking questions, a
finding out how the land lay. She knew that Geo
would lie; but that was to be expected from a man
juently to that had
and had asked, as
i's assistance. But
mind was nothing
ter dinner, as he

<#PG# 225>
position. She knew also that she could with fair
curacy extract the truth from his lies.
“Pay all your debts, and give you five hundred
"The Year for his life, and gives
“The lawyer has offered that,” said George, sadly.
“Then you may be sure,” continued Lady Altring-
n, “that the young lady is in earnest. You have
t accepted it?”
“Oh dear, no. I wrote to Sir Harry quite angrily.
cold him I wanted my cousin's hand.”
“And what next?”
"I have heard nothing further from anybody."
Lady Altringham sat and thought. “Are these
eople in London bothering you?” George explained
at he had been bothered a good deal, but not for
e last four or five days. “Can they put you in prison,
: anything of that kind?”
George was not quite sure whether they might or
ight not have some such power. He had a dreadful
eight on his mind of which he could say nothing to
ady Altringham. Even she would be repelled from
m were she to know of that evening's work between
im and Messrs. Walker and Bullbean. He said at
st that he did not think they could arrest him, but
at he was not quite sure.
“You must do something to let her know that you
e as much in earnest as she is."
“Exactly."
"It is ng
your letters."
“She wou
"And if )
thing secretly.
"I am afri
"You will
When girls co
before marriag
that they some
“She is as
the post as any
“No doubt
those girls do
very badly. T
naturally want
what I would
thwaite."
“To Humt
“Yes. Id
of anybody. :
to Sir Harry.
body about th
and then ask +
"He would
“Then ask
"She woul
"Then lea:

<#PG# 226>
OTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
hat she could with fair
his lies.
give you five hundred
t,” said George, sadly.
ontinued Lady Altring-
n earnest. You have
r Harry quite angrily.
hand.”
· from anybody."
hought. “Are these
" George explained
od deal, but not for
ney put you in prison,
“It is no use writing, because she wouldn't
your letters."
“She wouldn't have a chance."
“And if I understand her she would not do a
thing secretly.”
“I am afraid not,” said George.
“You will live, perhaps, to be glad that it is
When girls come out to meet their lovers clandestin
before marriage, they get so fond of the excitem
that they sometimes go on doing it afterwards.”
“She is as,-as-as sure to go the right side
the post as any girl in the world.”
“No doubt. So much the better for you. WE
those girls do catch the disease, they always have
very badly. They mean only to have one affair, a
naturally want to make the most of it. Well, n
what I would do is this. Run down to Humb
thwaite.”
“To Humblethwaite!”
“Yes. I don't suppose you are going to be afr:
of anybody. Knock at the door, and send your ca
to Sir Harry. Drive into the stable-yard, so that eve
body about the place may know that you are the
and then ask to see the Baronet.”
"He wouldn't see me.”
“Then ask to see Lady Elizabeth.”
“She wouldn't be allowed to see me.”
“Then leave a letter, and say that you'll wait f
hether they might or
He had a dreadful
ould say nothing to
ld be repelled from
uing's work between
Ibean. He said at
uld arrest him, but
her know that you

<#PG# 227>
224
in answer. Write to Miss Hotspur whatever you like
o say in the way of a love-letter, and put it under
over to Sir Harry-open.”
“She'll never get it.”
“I don't suppose she will. Not but what she may
-only that isn't the first object. But this will come
of it. She'll know that you've been there. That
can't be kept from her. You may be sure that she
was very firm in sticking to you when he offered to
ay all that money to get rid of you. She'll remain
rm if she's made to know that you are the same.
Don't let her love die out for want of notice.”
"I won't.”
"If they take her abroad, go after them. Stick to
i, and you'll wear them out if she helps you. And if
he knows that you are sticking to it, she'll do the
ame for. honour. When she begins to be a little
ale, and to walk out at nights, and to cough in the
morning, they'll be tired out and send for Dr. George
Iotspur. That's the way it will go if you play your
ame well.”
Cousin George was lost in admiration at the wis-
om and generalship of this great counsellor, and
romised implicit obedience. The Countess went on
) explain that it might be expedient to postpone this
movement for a week or two. “You should leave
ist a little interval, because you cannot always be
oing something. For some days after his return her
father won't ce
well in her mi
you again, so
down to Humb
a bushel. Le
about it.”
George Ho
plicit obedience
Mr. Hart a
much rest. Fr
communication.
it well to leave
Captain Stubber
know of Mr. B
had reached his
him in adding
titles with which
name. Had he
would probably
might have be
price than that
still in force.
also and his dif
were he to m
Hotspur's comm
so far sink Cap
the world that I
to pay Captain
Sir Harry Hotspur

<#PG# 228>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
TSPUR
pur whatever you like
Iter, and put it under
Not but what she may
t. But this will come
-e been there. That
may be sure that she
-u when he offered to
of you. She'll remain
hat you are the same.
ant of notice.”
after them. Stick to
he helps you. And if
· to it, she'll do the
begins to be a little
and to cough in the
send for Dr. George
! go if you play your
father won't cease to abuse you, which will keep y-
well in her mind. When those men begin to atta
you again, so as to make London too hot, then rı
down to Humblethwaite. Don't hide your light und
a bushel. Let the people down there know :
about it.”
George Hotspur swore eternal gratitude and ir
plicit obedience, and went back to his club. .
Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber did not give hi
much rest. From Mr. Boltby he received no furth
communication. For the present Mr. Boltby thoug!
it well to leave him in the hands of Mr. Hart an
Captain Stubber. Mr. Boltby, indeed, did not as y
know of Mr. Bullbean's story, although certain hin
had reached him which had, as he thought, justifie
him in adding the title of card-sharper to those othe
titles with which he had decorated his client's cousin
name. Had he known the entire Walker story, h
would probably have thought that Cousin Georg
might have been bought at a considerably cheape
price than that fixed in the Baronet's offer, which wa
still in force. But then Mr. Hart had his little doubt
also and his difficulties. He, too, could perceive tha
were he to make this last little work of Captain
Hotspur's common property in the market, it migh
so far sink Captain Hotspur's condition and value ir
the world that nobody would think it worth his while
to pay Captain Hotspur's debts. At present there
Sir Harry Hotspur.
Imiration at the wis-
eat counsellor, and
e Countess went on
ent to postpone this
"You should leave
cannot always be
after his return her

<#PG# 229>
226
was a proposition from an old gentleman, possessed
of enormous wealth, to “pay all Captain Hotspur's
debts.” Three months ago, Mr. Hart would willingly
have sold every scrap of the Captain's paper in his
possession for the half of the sum inscribed on it.
The whole sum was now promised, and would un-
doubtedly be paid if the Captain could be worked
upon to do as Mr. Boltby desired. But if the gentle-
men employed on this delicate business were to blow
upon the Captain too severely, Mr. Boltby would have
no such absolute necessity to purchase the Captain.
The Captain would sink to zero, and not need
purchasing. Mr. Walker must have back his money,
--or so much of it as Mr. Hart might permit him to
take. That probably might be managed; and the
Captain must be thoroughly frightened, and must be
made to write the letter which Mr. Boltby desired.
Mr. Hart understood his work very well;—so, it is
hoped, does the reader.
Captain Stubber was in these days a thorn in our
hero's side; but Mr. Hart was a scourge of scorpions.
Mr. Hart never ceased to talk of Mr. Walker, and of
the determination of Walker and Bullbean to go before
a magistrate if restitution were not made. Cousin
George of course denied the foul play, but admitted
that he would repay the money if he had it. There
should be no difficulty about the money, Mr. Hart
assured him, if he would only write that letter to Mr.
Boltby. In fa
Boltby, he st
Mr. Hart was
were not don
his God that
root and bra
choice was
any of thes
debt, -or pt
form in whic
friend,
Cousin Ge
doubted bety
He knew tha
Countess. E
was her wisd
than the Jew
dark. The I
Jew was inter
must also be
Mr. Hart an
made Londo
Humblethwait
Mr. Hart," i
that he was g
purpose that
him to pay er

<#PG# 230>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
old gentleman, possessed
ly all Captain Hotspur's
Mr. Hart would willingly
Captain's paper in his
e sum inscribed on it
omised, and would un-
ptain could be worked
red. But if the gentle-
business were to blow
Mr. Boltby would have
purchase the Captain.
zero, and not need
have back his money,
t might permit him to
se managed; and the
ghtened, and must be
2 Mr. Boltby desired
very well;—80, it is
Boltby. In fact, if he would write that letter to
Boltby, he should be made “shquare all round.”
Mr. Hart was pleased to express himself. But if
were not done, and done at once, Mr. Hart swore
his God that Captain “'Oshspur” should be sold
root and branch, without another day's mercy..
choice was between five hundred pounds a year
any of the capitals of Europe, and that withou
debt,-or penal servitude. That was the pleas
form in which Mr. Hart put the matter to his you
friend.
Cousin George drank a good deal of curacoa, a
doubted between Lady Altringham and Mr. Ha
He knew that he had not told everything to i
Countess. Excellent as was her scheme, perfect
was her wisdom, her advice was so far more dangers
than the Jew's, that it was given somewhat in 1
dark. The Jew knew pretty well everything. I
Jew was interested, of course, and therefore his adv.
must also be regarded with suspicion. At last, wb
Mr. Hart and Captain Stubber between them h
made London too hot to hold him, he started i
Humblethwaite, --- not without leaving a note for “de
Mr. Hart," in which he explained to that gentlem
that he was going to Westmoreland suddenly, with
purpose that would, he trusted, very speedily enal
him to pay every shilling that he owed.
e days a thorn in our
scourge of scorpions.
: Mr. Walker, and of
Bullbean to go before
not made. Cousin
il play, but admitted
if he had it. There
ie money, Mr. Hart
ite that letter to Mr.
15*

<#PG# 231>
“Yesh," said Mr. Hart, “and if he ain't quick he
all come back with a 'andcuff on."
Captain Hotspur could not very well escape Mr.
art. He started by the night-train for Penrith, and
efore doing so prepared a short letter for Miss
otspur, which, as instructed, he put open under an
nvelope addressed to the Baronet. There should be
othing clandestine, nothing dishonourable. Oh dear,
0! He quite taught himself to believe that he would
ave hated anything dishonourable or clandestine.
His letter was as follows:-
hand, was
as this. La
rough copy
copied her
matter of do
average wor
average man
to obtain ass
"DEAREST EMILY,-After what has passed between
is, I cannot bear not to attempt to see you or to
vrite to you. So I shall go down and take this letter
vith me. Of course I shall not take any steps of
vhích Sir Harry might disapprove. I wrote to him
wo or three weeks ago, telling him what I proposed,
nd I thought that he would have answered me. As
have not heard from him I shall take this with me
o Humblethwaite, and shall hope, though I do not
now whether I may dare to expect, to see the girl I
ove better than all the world. Always your own,
“GEORGE HOTSPUR."
He slept
fasted and st
He felt that
was almost a
obeyed his i
through the 1
stable-yard o
understood t.
in this way +
and were fro
the coachman
the maids wl
that the groc
had brought
to be asked t
be prepared.
walked round
already there
through the b
Even this was not composed by himself, for Cousin
jeorge, though he could often talk well, or at least
ufficiently well for the purposes which he had on
Sir Harry at

<#PG# 232>
TOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
and if he ain't quick he
iff on."
ot very well escape Mr.
t-train for Penrith, and
- short letter for Miss
he put open under an
onet. There should be
shonourable. Oh dear,
believe that he would
urable or clandestine.
mat has passed between
apt to see you or to
wn and take this letter
ot take any steps of
ove. I wrote to him
him what I proposed,
ve answered me. As
all take this with me
ve, though I do not
vect, to see the girl I
lways your own,
EORGE HOTSPUR."
hand,—was not good with his pen on such an occas
as this. Lady Altringham had sent him by pos
rough copy of what he had better say, and he i
copied her ladyship's words verbatim. There is
matter of doubt at all but that on all such subjects
average woman can write a better letter than
average man; and Cousin George was therefore ri
to obtain assistance from his female friends.
He slept at Penrith till nearly noon, then bre
fasted and started with post-horses for Humblethwa
He felt that everybody knew what he was about, a
was almost ashamed of being seen. Nevertheless
obeyed his instructions. He had himself driven
through the lodges and across the park into the la:
stable-yard of the Hall. Lady Altringham had qu
understood that more people must see and hear
in this way than if he merely rang at the front de
and were from thence dismissed. The grooms a
the coachman saw him, as did also three or four
the maids who were in the habit of watching to
that the grooms and coachman did their work.
had brought with him a travelling-bag, -not expect
to be asked to stay and dine, but thinking it well
be prepared. This, however, he left in the fly as
walked round to the hall-door. The footman
already there when he appeared, as word had g
through the house that Mr. George had arrived.
Sir Harry at home? Yes, Sir Harry was at home
y himself, for Cousin
ulk well, or at least
which he had on

<#PG# 233>
d then George found himself in a small parlour, or
ok-room, or subsidiary library, which he had very
sely known to be used. But there was a fire in the
om, and he stood before it, twiddling his hat.
In a quarter of an hour the door was opened, and
ne servant came in with a tray and wine and sand-
Fiches. George felt it to be an inappropriate wel-
ome; but still, after a fashion, it was a welcome.
"Is Sir Harry in the house?” he asked.
“Yes, Mr. Hotspur.”
“Does he know that I am here?”
“Yes, Mr. Hotspur, I think he does."
Then it occurred to Cousin George that perhaps
ne might bribe the servant; and he put his hand into
his pocket. But before he had communicated the two
half-crowns, it struck him that there was no possible
equest which he could make to the man in reference
:o which a bribe would be serviceable.
“Just ask them to look to the horses," he said;
'I don't know whether they were taken out."
“The horses is feeding, Mr. Hotspur,” said the
nan.
Every word the man spoke was gravely spoken,
ind George understood perfectly that he was held to
lave done a very wicked thing in coming to Humble-
hwaite. Nevertheless, there was a decanter full of
sherry, which, as far as it went, was an emblem of
kindness. Nobody should say that he was unwilling
to accept kii
helped himse
again he had
But in the
For a whole
was left alor
hundreds of
could read?
books at no
thrice he step
it, and ask ag
he paused. I
offence to Sir
and with sile
solemn count
the room..
have been ke
she said.

<#PG# 234>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
elf in a small parlour, or
rary, which he had very
it there was a fire in the
twiddling his hat.
e door was opened, and
ray and wine and sando
: an inappropriate wel
it was a welcome.
?” he asked.
to accept kindness at his cousin's hands, and
helped himself liberally. Before he was interrupt
again he had filled his glass four times.
But in truth it needed something to support hi
For a whole hour after the servant's disappearance
was left alone. There were books in the room,
hundreds of them; but in such circumstances w
could read? Certainly not Cousin George, to who
books at no time gave much comfort. Twice a
thrice he stepped towards the bell, intending to ri
it, and ask again for Sir Harry; but twice and thri
he paused. In his position he was bound not to gi
offence to Sir Harry. At last the door was opene
and with silent step, and grave demeanour, aj
solemn countenance, Lady Elizabeth walked in
the room. “We are very sorry that you shou
have been kept so long waiting, Captain Hotspu
she said.
here?"
he does.”
2 George that perhaps
he put his hand into
communicated the two
there was no possible
the man in reference
ceable.
the horses," he said;
e taken out.”
-. Hotspur," said the
was gravely spoken,
that he was held to
i coming to Humble
3 a decanter full of
, was an emblem of
at he was unwilling

<#PG# 235>
232
CHAPTER XIX.
The new Smithy.
SIR HARRY was sitting alone in the library when
the tidings were brought to him that George Hotspur
had reached Humblethwaite with a pair of post-horses
from Penrith. The old butler, Cloudesdale, brought
him the news, and Cloudesdale whispered it into his
ears with solemn sorrow. Cloudesdale was well aware
that Cousin George was no credit to the house of
Humblethwaite. And much about the same time the
information was brought to Lady Elizabeth by her
housekeeper, and to Emily by her own maid. It was
by Cloudesdale's orders that George was shown into
the small room near the hall; and he told Şir Harry
what he had done in a funereal whisper. Lady
Altringham had been quite right in her method of
ensuring the general delivery of the information about
he house.
Emily flew at once to her mother. “George is
here,” she said. Mrs. Quick, the housekeeper, was at
hat moment leaving the room.
“So Quick tells me. What can have brought him,
ay dear?”
“Why should he not come, Mamma?”
“Because
to the house.
we to do?"
again. Sir H
ship would {
wiches and
mise on the
prayer that s
Harry's pres
man should
“Take him se
of wine or so
had cut the
Cloudesdale i
much, but he
dale, when th
Lady Eli.
there was a
that he wou
George as a
him. To th
been with !
there, at H
say that coc
be arranged
that he cou
from any r
don't want

<#PG# 236>
Y HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
R XIX.
Smithy.
alone in the library when
him that George Hotspur
with a pair of post-horses
er, Cloudesdale, brought
ale whispered it into his
budesdale was well aware
credit to the house of
about the same time the
Lady Elizabeth by her
her own maid. It was
George was shown into
and he told Sir Harry
nereal whisper. Lady
ght in her method of
the information about
“Because your papa will not make him welce
to the house. Oh, dear,ấhe knows that. What
we to do?” In a few minutes Mrs. Quick came b
again. Sir Harry would be much obliged if her la
ship would go to him. Then it was that the sa
wiches and sherry were ordered. It was a com
mise on the part of Lady Elizabeth between Emi
prayer that some welcome might be shown, and
Harry's presumed determination that the banis
man should continue to be regarded as banish
“Take him some kind of refreshment, Quick;~a g.
of wine or something, you know.” Then Mrs. Qu
had cut the sandwiches with her own hand, i
Cloudesdale had given the sherry. “He ain't ea
much, but he's made it up with the wine,” said Cloud
dale, when the tray was brought back again.
· Lady Elizabeth went down to her husband, :
there was a consultation. Sir Harry was quite c
that he would not now, on this day, admit Coi
George as a guest into his house; nor would he
him. To that conclusion he came after his wife
been with him some time. He would not see !
there, at Humblethwaite. If George had anythin
say that could not be said in a letter, a meeting m
be arranged elsewhere. Sir Harry confessed, howe
that he could not see that good results could c
from any meeting whatsoever. “The truth is, ti
don't want to have anything more to do with h
mother. "George is
le housekeeper, was at
an have brought him,
lamma?"

<#PG# 237>
'34
aid Sir Harry. That was all very well, but as Emily's
vants in this respect were at variance with her father's,
here was a difficulty. Lady Elizabeth pleaded that
ome kind of civility, at least some mitigation of op-
osition, should be shown, for Emily's sake. At last
he was commissioned to go to Cousin George, to
end him away from the house, and, if necessary, to
nake an appointment between him and Sir Harry at
he Crown, at Penrith, for the morrow. Nothing on
arth should induce Sir Harry to see his cousin any-
vhere on his own premises. As for any meeting be-
ween Cousin George and Emily, that was, of course,
out of the question,-and he must go from Hum-
olethwaite. Such were the instructions with which
Lady Elizabeth descended to the little room. ,
Cousin George came forward with the pleasantest
-mile to take. Lady Elizabeth by the hand. He was
considerably relieved when he saw Lady Elizabeth,
because of her he was not afraid. “I do not at all
nind waiting," he said. “How is Sir Harry?”
“Quite well.”
“And yourself?”
“Pretty well, thank you.”
"And Emily?"
Lady Elizabeth knew that in answering him she
ught to call her own daughter Miss Hotspur, but she
Lcked the courage. “Emily is well too. Sir Harry
as thought it best that I should come to you and
explain that ji
Humblethwaite.
"I did not
“And he h
not here.” L
to propose a :
avoid it if po
matic ambassa
at once to the
"If you have a
“I have, L
"And if yo
"I am so !
“Then Sir
row at Penrith
"That will
"You need
he come?"
Cousin Ge
would be at
Harry might
out the day a
to Emily? A
her head vigo
tion. Circum
Harry would
would do no
that Emily h

<#PG# 238>
TOTSPUR
very well, but as Emily's
ariance with her father's,
Elizabeth pleaded that
some mitigation of op-
r Emily's sake. At last
to Cousin George, to
, and, if necessary, to
him and Sir Harry at
2 morrow. Nothing on
to see his cousin any.
As for any meeting be
ly, that was, of course,
must go from Hum
mstructions with which
e little room.
d with the pleasantest
uy the hand. He was
saw Lady Elizabeth,
Lid. “I do not at all
is Sir Harry?"
explain that just at present he cannot ask you
Humblethwaite."
“I did not expect it.”
“And he had rather not see you himself,--at le
not here." Lady Elizabeth had not been instruc
to propose a meeting. She had been told rather
avoid it if possible. But, like some other undip
matic ambassadors, in her desire to be civil, she r
at once to the extremity of the permitted concession
“If you have anything to say to Sir Harry—"
“I have, Lady Elizabeth; a great deal.”
“And if you could write it "
“I am so bad at writing.”
“Then Sir Harry will go over and see you to-mc
row at Penrith.”
“That will be so very troublesome to him!”
“You need not regard that. At what hour shi
he come?"
Cousin George was profuse in declaring that i
would be at bis cousin's disposal at any hours
Harry might select, from six in the morning throug?
out the day and night. But might he not say a woi
to Emily? At this proposition Lady Elizabeth shoc
her head vigorously. It was quite out of the que
tion. Circumstanced as they all were at present, s
Harry would not think of such a thing. And then
would do no good. Lady Elizabeth did not belier
that Emily herself would wish it. At any rate thei
2 answering him she
ſiss Hotspur, but she
well too. Sir Harry
d come to you and

<#PG# 239>
236
need be no further talk about it, as any such inter-
view was at present quite impossible. By all which
arguments and refusals, and the tone in which they
were pronounced, Cousin George was taught to per-
ceive that, at any rate in the nuind of Lady Eliza-
beth, the process of parental yielding had already
commenced.
On all such occasions interviews are bad. The
teller of this story ventures to take the opportunity of
recommending parents in such cases always to refuse
interviews, not only between the young lady and the
lover who is to be excluded, but also between them-
selves and the lover. The vacillating tone,-even
when the resolve to suppress vacillation has been most
determined, -is perceived and understood, and at once
utilized, by the least argumentative of lovers, even by
lovers who are obtuse. The word "never" may be so
pronounced as to make the young lady's twenty thou-
sand pounds full present value for ten in the lover's
pocket. There should be no arguments, no letters, no
interviews; and the young lady's love should be starved
by the absence of all other mention of the name, and
by the imperturbable good humour on all other matters
of those with whom she comes in contact in her own
domestic circle. If it be worth anything, it won't be
starved; but if starving to death be possible, that is
the way to starve it. Lady Elizabeth was a bad am-
bassador; and Cousin George, when he took his leave,
promising to bi
the morrow, c
spect of succes
could stave off
Hart's persecu
cess of his vie
payment by Si
Hart and Capti
He would hav
Walker and Bu
already knew 1
ready knew w
debts. Harta
in Sir Harry's
Walker and
purpose of des
and Bullbean
yet the mone
champagne a
Walker's mon
he thought of
at others almo
Mr. Hart, wit
good? That e
letter :-
"DEAR M
well here, on

<#PG# 240>
! HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
bout it, as any such inter-
impossible. By all which
3 the tone in which they
George was taught to per
the nuind of Lady Eliza
ital yielding had already
terviews are bad. The
) take the opportunity of
ch cases always to refuse
the young lady and the
but also between them
vacillating tone, even
wacillation has been most
understood, and at once
itative of lovers, even by
vord“ never” may be so
vung lady's twenty thou-
e for ten in the lover's
guments, no letters, no
's love should be starved
ntion of the name, and
our on all other matters
promising to be ready to meet Sir Harry at twelve
the morrow, could almost comfort himself with a p
spect of success. He might be successful, if only
could stave off the Walker and Bullbean portion of I
Hart's persecution! For he understood that the su
cess of his views at Humblethwaite must postpone t
payment by Sir Harry of those moneys for which in
Hart and Captain Stubber were so unreasonably greed
He would have dared to defy the greed, but for t.
Walker and Bullbean portion of the affair. Sir Har
already knew that he was in debt to these men; a
ready knew with fair accuracy the amount of tho.
debts. Hart and Stubber could not make him wor:
in Sir Harry's eyes than he was already, unless th
Walker and Bullbean story should be told with tł
purpose of destroying him. How he did hate Walk
and Bullbean and the memory of that evening;-an
yet the money which now enabled him to drir.
champagne at the Penrith Crown was poor M
Walker's money! As he was driven back to Penrit
he thought of all this, for some moments sadly, an
at others almost with triumph. Might not a letter t
Mr. Hart, with perhaps a word of truth in it, do som
good? That evening, after his champagne, he wrote
letter:-
in contact in her own
anything, it won't be
h be possible, that is
zabeth was a bad am-
hen he took his leave,
“Dear MR. HART,—Things are going uncommo:
well here, only I hope you will do nothing to distur

<#PG# 241>
238
just at present. It must come off, if a little time is
given, and then every shilling will be paid. A few
pounds more or less won't make any difference. Do
arrange this, and you'll find I'll never forget how kind
you have been. I've been at Humblethwaite to-day,
and things are going quite smooth.
“Yours most sincerely,
“GEORGE HOTSPUR.
“Don't mention Walker's name, and everything
shall be settled just as you shall fix.
“The Crown, Penrith, Thursday."
--but with his
come, and su
as he was awa
Hart, he rang
which he had
night were sti
letter in which
of Mr. Walker
mind,” said C
brave deserve
another nap.
Harry would n
In the me
doubt also at
surprised and
that he was to
offer had been
he would not
told by her m
a way to the
made to her
The moment the letter was written he rang the
bell and gave it to the waiter. Such was the valour
of drink operating on him now, as it had done when
he wrote that other letter to Sir Harry! The drink
made him brave to write, and to make attempts, and
to dare consequences; but even whilst brave with
drink, he knew that the morning's prudence would
refuse its assent to such courage; and therefore, to
save himself from the effects of the morning's coward-
ice, he put the letter at once out of his own power
of control. After this fashion were arranged most of
Cousin George's affairs. Before dinner on that day
the evening of which he had passed with Mr. Walker,
he had resolved that certain hints given to him by
Mr. Bullbean should be of no avail to him;—not to
that had he yet descended, nor would he so descend;
that evening,
ing to her,
following moi
that evening
Sir Harry and
daughter. E
to it. Her fat

<#PG# 242>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
ome off, if a little time is
ing will be paid. A few
make any difference. Do
I'll never forget how kind
at Humblethwaite to-day,
nooth.
sincerely,
“GEORGE HOTSPUR.
name, and everything
all fix.
ursday."
as written he rang the
1. Such was the valour
v, as it had done when
Sir Harry! The drink
to make attempts, and
ven whilst brave with
ning's prudence would
age; and therefore, to
the morning's coward-
out of his own power
were arranged most of
dinner on that day
but with his brandy after dinner divine courage
come, and success had attended the brave. As s
as he was awake on that morning after writing to
Hart, he rang his bell to inquire whether that let
which he had given to the waiter at twelve o'clock i
night were still in the house. It was too late. I
letter in which so imprudent a mention had been ma
of Mr. Walker's name was already in the post. “Ne
mind,” said Cousin George to himself; “None but 1
brave deserve the fair.” Then he turned round
another nap. It was not much past nine, and
Harry would not be there before twelve.
In the mean time there had been hope also a
doubt also at Humblethwaite. Sir Harry was r
surprised and hardly disappointed when he was to
that he was to go to Penrith to see his cousin. T
offer had been made by himself, and he was sure th
he would not escape with less; and when Emily w
told by her mother of the arrangement, she saw in
a way to the fulfilment of the prayer which she hi
made to her father. She would say nothing to hi
that evening, leaving to him the opportunity of spea
ing to her, should he choose to do so. But on t]
following morning she would repeat her prayer. C
that evening not a word was said about George whi
Sir Harry and Lady Elizabeth were together with the
daughter. Emily had made her plan, and she clur
to it. Her father was very gentle with her, sitting clo:
„ssed with Mr. Walker,
ints given to him by
avail to him;--not to
would he so descend;

<#PG# 243>
40
of an hour be
work at Humb
man or men w
of an hour,
gardener, or a
made her appe
or the bailiff w
ensure a priva
to wait till afte
very few minut
the door and
was then sugge
"Papa," sa
a minute—_"
, her as she played some pieces of music to him in
je evening, caressing her and looking lovingly into
er eyes, as he bade God bless her when she left him
or the night; but he had determined to say nothing
, encourage her. He was still minded that there
ould be no such encouragement; but he doubted;
1 his heart of hearts he doubted. He would still
ave bought off Cousin George by the sacrifice of half
is property, and yet he doubted. After all, there
rould be some consolation in that binding together of
he name and the property.
“What will you say to him?" Lady Elizabeth asked
jer husband that night.
“Tell him to go away."
“Nothing more than that?"
“What more is there to say? If he be willing to
pe bought, I will buy him. I will pay his debts and
Five him an income....--**** ***
-“You think, then, there can be no hope?".
“Hope!—for whom?"
"For Emily.”
“I hope to preserve her—from a-scoundrel.” And
-et he had thought of the consolation!
Emily was very persistent in carrying out her plan.
Prayers at Humblethwaite were always read with ad-
nirable punctuality at a quarter-past nine, so that
breakfast might be commenced at half-past. Sir Harry
every week-day was in his own room for three-quarters.
“The villag
also present, 1
to each of the
old familiar fr:
She was to be
all important
Hotspur?
Sir Harry
daughter woul
to avoid the i
ever, and coul
"Papa," sł
Penrith to-day
"Yes, my
Sir Harry Hotsp

<#PG# 244>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
HOTSPUR
pieces of music to him in
nd looking lovingly into
ss her when she left him
termined to say nothing
still minded that there
ent; but he doubted;-
vubted. He would still
by the sacrifice of half
abted. After all, there
that binding together of
» Lady Elizabeth asked
of an hour before prayers. All this was like cloc
work at Humblethwaite. There would always be son
man or men with Sir Harry during these three-quarte
of an hour,--a tenant, a game-keeper, a groom,
gardener, or a bailiff. But Emily calculated that if s]
made her appearance and held her ground, the tena:
or the bailiff would give way, and that thus she wou
ensure a private interview with her father. Were sł
to wait till after breakfast, this would be difficult.
very few minutes after the half-hour she knocked
the door and was admitted. The village blacksmit
was then suggesting a new smithy.
“Papa," said Emily, “if you would allow me ha
a minute--"
“The village blacksmith and the bailiff, who wa
also present, withdrew, bowing to Emily, who gav
to each of them a smile and a nod. They were he
old familiar friends, and they looked kindly at hei
She was to be their future lady; but was it no
all important that their future lord should be i
Hotspur?
Sir Harry had thought it not improbable that hi
daughter would come to him, but would have preferred
to avoid the interview if possible. Here it was, how
ever, and could not be avoided.
“Papa,” she said, kissing him, "you are going to
Penrith to-day.”
"Yes, my dear.”
Sir Harry Hotspur.
-? If he be willing to
will pay his debts and
be no hope?"
2-scoundrel." And
jon!
zrying out her plan.
ays read with ad-
ast nine, so that
/f-past. Sir Harry
for three-quarters
16

<#PG# 245>
242
“To see Cousin George?”
“Yes, Emily."
“Will you remember what we were saying the
other day;—what I said?" .
“I will endeavour to do my duty as best I may,"
said Sir Harry, after a pause.
“I am sure you will, Papa;—and so do I. I do
endeavour to do my duty. Will you not try to help
him ?"
“Certainly, I will try to help him; for your sake
rather than for his own. If I can help him with
money, by paying his debts and giving him means to
live, I will do so.”
“Papa, that is not what I mean.”
“What else can I do?”.
“Save him from the evil of his ways."
“I will try. I would, --if I knew how, even if
only for the name's sake.”
“For my sake also, Papa. Papa, let us do it to-
gether; you and I and Mamma. Let him come here."
“It is impossible.”
“Let him come here,” she said, as though dis-
regarding his refusal. “You need not be afraid of
me. I know how much there is to do that will be
very hard in doing before any,--any other arrangement
can be talked about.”
“I am not afraid of you, my child."
“Let him come, then."
"No;—it
would live her
"Try him.
“What wo
“Never m
cousin; he is
love best in
have him her
thinking of; 1
else;—-never."
"Emily, ys
"Dear Pap
Papa, pray, 1
away the baili
Harry's power
cumbed to the

<#PG# 246>
HOTSPUR
2
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
pas
hat we were saying the
my duty as best I may,"
pa;—and so do I. I do
Will you not try to help
“No;-it would do no good. Do you think
would live here quietly?”
“Try him."
“What would people say?"
“Never mind what people would say: he is
cousin; he is your heir. He is the person whom
love best in all the world. Have you not a right
have him here if you wish it? I know what you a
thinking of; but, Papa, there can never be anybo
else;—never.”
"Emily, you will kill me, I think.”
“Dear Papa, let us see if we cannot try. And,
Papa, pray, pray let me see him.” When she we
away the bailiff and the blacksmith returned; but s
Harry's power of resistance was gone, so that he su
cumbed to the new smithy without a word.
help him; for your sake
If I can help him with
and giving him means to
mean."
his ways."
I knew how,—even if
Papa, let us do it to-
Let him come here."
raid, as though dis-
ed not be afraid of
to do that will be
- Other arrangement
Id"

<#PG# 247>
:44
CHAPTER XX.
Cousin George's Success.
glory to the
he be justific
ing his child
and family
take his owr
weight towa:
wishes, grous
Mr. Boltby
ought to ha
loaded the
epithet; and
could be no
THOUGHTS crowded quick into the mind of Sir
Jarry Hotspur as he had himself driven over to Penrith.
it was a dull, dreary day in November, and he took
he close carriage. The distance was about ten miles,
ind he had therefore something above an hour for
hinking. When 'men think much, they can rarely
decide. The affairs as to which a man has once
ucknowledged to himself that he may be either wise
or foolish, prudent or imprudent, are seldom matters
on which he can by any amount of thought bring
Eimself to a purpose which to his own eyes shall be
clearly correct. When he can decide without thinking,
then he can decide without a doubt, and with perfect
satisfaction. But in this matter Sir Harry thought
much. There had been various times at which he was
quite sure that it was his duty to repudiate this cousin
utterly. There had never been a time at which he
had been willing to accept him. Nevertheless, at this
moment, with all his struggles of thought he could
not resolve. Was his higher duty due to his daughter,
or to his family,--and through his family to his
country, which, as he believed, owed its security and
exceeded his
his professio
the wisest wh
dangeroush
things to be
-the family
himself; and
that his chile
he would coi
lover.
Doubtless
sick at heart
young man's
extravagant
drunkard, on
of one even

<#PG# 248>
OTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
XX.
Success.
into the mind of Sir
Ef driven over to Penrith.
ovember, and he took
-ce was about ten miles,
Eng above an hour for
much, they can rarely
-hich a man has once
he may be either wise
nt, are seldom matters
ount of thought bring
his own eyes shall be
!ecide without thinking,
oubt, and with perfect
ter Sir Harry thought
times at which he was
glory to the maintenance of its aristocracy? W
he be justified,—justified in any degree,—in sub
ing his child to danger in the hope that his n
and family pride might be maintained? Might
take his own desires in that direction as any mi
weight towards a compliance with his girl's str
wishes, grounded as they were on quite other reas
Mr. Boltby had been very eager in telling him tha
ought to have nothing to say to this cousin,
loaded the cousin's name with every imaginable
epithet; and of Mr. Boltby's truth and honesty ti
could be no doubt. But then Mr. Boltby had certa
exceeded his duty, and was of course disposed,
his professional view of the matter, to think any
the wisest which would tend to save the property fi
dangerous hands. Sir Harry felt that there w
things to be saved of more value than the prope
-the family, the title, perhaps that reprobate con
himself; and then, above all, his child. He did beli
that his child would not smile for him again, un
he would consent to make some effort in favour of
lover.
Doubtless the man was very bad. Sir Harry
sick at heart as he thought of the evil nature of
young man's vices. Of a man debauched in his 1
extravagant with his money, even of a gambler,
drunkard, one fond of low men and of low women;
of one even such as this there might be hope, and
7 repudiate this cousin
a time at which he
Nevertheless, at this
of thought he could
y due to his daughter,
2 his family to his
owed its security and

<#PG# 249>
:46
ricious man, if he will give up his vices, may still be
oved and at last respected. But of a liar, a swindler,
one mean as well as vicious, what hope could there
pe? It was essential to Sir Harry that the husband
of his daughter should at any rate be a gentleman.
Che man's blood, indeed, was good; and blood will
show at last, let the mud be ever so deep. So said
Sir Harry to himself. And Emily would consent that
Che man should be tried by what severest fire might
De kindled for the trying of him. If there were any
gold there, it might be possibleto send the dross
adrift, and to get the gold without alloy. Could Lady
Altringham have read Sir Harry's mind as his carriage
was pulled up, just at twelve o'clock, at the door of
che Penrith Crown, she would have been stronger than
ever in her belief that young lovers, if they be firm,
can always conquer opposing parents.
But alas, alas, there was no gold with this dross,
and in that matter of blood, as to which Sir Harry's
ideas were so strong, and indeed so noble, he enter-
tained but a muddled theory. Noblesse oblige. High
position will demand, and will often exact, high work.
But that rule holds as good with a Buonaparte as
with a Bourbon, with a Cromwell as with a Stewart
and succeeds as often and fails as often with the low
born as with the high. And good blood too will have
its effect, --- physical for the most part, ---and will
produce bottom, lasting courage, that capacity of cara
rying on thro
wont to allude
back to honest
assist in prod
man.
· When Sir
not yet made
told that he
once into the
street, which
occasion. He
had been smo
room there w
chiffonier in 0.
the arrival, az
prepared for
so sorry to giv
coming forwar
Sir Harry (
he would willi
“I should not
of any use.
"I hopes
Sir Harry."
“I trust th
What is it tha
"I want F

<#PG# 250>
10TSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
ip his vices, may still be
But of a liar, a swindler,
what hope could there
Harry that the husband
2y rate be a gentleman.
as good; and blood will
ever so deep. So said
mily would consent that
what severest fire might
him. If there were any
ibleto send the dross
hout alloy. Could Lady
y's mind as his carriage
o'clock, at the door of
mave been stronger than
lovers, if they be firm,
arents.
o gold with this dross,
is to which Sir Harry's
ed so noble, be enter-
Noblesse oblige. High
often exact, high work.
with a Buonaparte as
ell as with a Stewart,
rying on through the mud to which Sir Harry y
wont to allude; but good blood will bring no m
back to honesty. The two things together, no dou
assist in producing the highest order of self-denyi
man.
· When Sir Harry got out of his carriage, he h
not yet made up his mind. The waiter had be
told that he was expected, and showed him up
once into the large sitting-room looking out into t
street, which Cousin George had bespoke fort
occasion. He had had a smaller room himself, z
had been smoking there, and at this moment in th
room there was a decanter and a wine-glass on t
chiffonier in one corner. He had heard the bustle
the arrival, and had at once gone into the salo
prepared for the reception of the great man. “Ia
so sorry to give you this trouble,” said Cousin Georg
coming forward to greet his uncle.
Sir Harry could not refuse his cousin's hand, thou
he would willingly have done so, had it been possib.
“I should not mind the trouble,” he said, “if it we
of any use. I fear it can be of none."
“I hope you will not be prejudiced against m
Sir Harry."
“I trust that I am not prejudiced against any on
What is it that you wish me to do?"
- "I want permission to go to Humblethwaite, as
as often with the low
d blood too will have
nost part, and will
that capacity of care

<#PG# 251>
248
suitor for your daughter's hand.” So far Cousin George
had prepared his speech beforehand.
“And what have you to recommend you to a father
for such permission? Do you not know, sir, that when
a gentleman proposes to a lady it is his duty to show
that he is in a condition fit for the position which he
seeks; that in character, in means, in rank, in conduct,
he is at least her equal."
“As for our rank, Sir Harry, it is the same.”
"And for your means? You know that my daughter
is my heiress?”
“I do; but it is not that that has brought me to
her. Of course, I have nothing. But then, you know,
though she will inherit the estates, I must inherit "
“If you please, sir, we will not go into all that
again,” said Sir Harry, interrupting him. “I explained
to you before, sir, that I would have admitted your
future rank as a counterpoise to her fortune, if I could
have trusted your character. I cannot trust it. I do
not know why you should thrust upon me the necessity
of saying all this again. As I believe that you are in
pecuniary distress, I made you an offer which I thought
to be liberal."
“It was liberal, but it did not suit me to accept
it.” George had an inkling of what would pass within
Sir Harry's bosom as to the acceptance or rejection of
that offer. “I wrote to you, declining it, and as I
have received
run down. V
"Do? Ho
was offered yo
"I cannot
allowed to r
yesterday?"
Now Sir
mind as to t
view it had si
was preparing
mind that sh
had been coi
instruction ar
keep it from
but she was t
to her, and t
swered.
"It does
said Sir Hair
accept the off
your written
"I cannot
Sir Harry
interview. A
must be mad
altogether ol
Humblethwait

<#PG# 252>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE,
COTSPUR
1." So far Cousin George
cehand.
commend you to a father
not know, sir, that when
Hy it is his duty to show
or the position which he
ans, in rank, in conduct,
zy, it is the same."
-u know that my daughter
that has brought me to
g. But then, you know,
utes, I must inherit "
ill not go into all that
ting him. “I explained
uld have admitted your
her fortune, if I could
cannot trust it. I do
: upon me the necessity
believe that you are in
n offer which I thought
have received no answer, I thought that I would i
run down. What was I to do?”
"Do? How can I tell? Pay your debts. The moi
was offered you."
"I cannot give up my cousin. Has she be
allowed to receive the letter which I left for ]
yesterday?"
Now Sir Harry had doubted much in his o
mind as to the letter. During that morning's int
view it had still been in his own possession. As
was preparing to leave the house he had made up
mind that she should have it; and Lady Elizabe
had been commissioned to give it her, not with
instruction and explanation. Her father would r
keep it from her, because he trusted her implicit
but she was to understand that it could mean nothi.
to her, and that the letter must not of course be a
swered.
"It does not matter whether she did or did no
said Sir Harry. “I ask you again, whether you w
accept the offer made you by Mr. Boltby, and give r
your written promise not to renew this suit.”
"I cannot do that, Sir Harry."
Sir Harry did not know how to proceed with t
interview. As he had come there, some propositi
must be made by himself. Had he intended to
altogether obstinate he should have remained
Humblethwaite, and kept his cousin altogether o
not suit me to accept
hat would pass within
ptance or rejection of
eclining it, and as I

<#PG# 253>
50
of the house. And now his daughter's prayers were
inging in his ears: “Dear Papa, let us see if we
cannot try.” And then again that assurance which
she had made him so solemnly: “Papa, there never
can be anybody else!” If the black sheep could be
vashed white, the good of such washing would on
every side be so great! He would have to blush,--
Iet the washing be ever so perfect,—he must always
Slush in having such a son-in-law; but he had been
forced to acknowledge to himself of late, that there
was infinitely more of trouble and shame in this world
than of joy or honour. Was it not in itself a disgrace
that a Hotspur should do such things as this cousin
had done; and a disgrace also that his daughter should
have loved a man so unfit to be her lover? And then
from day to day, and from hour to hour, he remembered
Ehat these ills were added to the death of that son,
who, had he lived, would have been such a glory to
nim. More of trouble and disgrace! Was it not all
crouble and disgrace? He would have wished that the
Hay might come for him to go away and leave it all,
vere it not that for one placed as he was placed his
own life would not see the end of these troubles. He
must endeavour to provide that everything should not
co to utter ruin as soon as he should have taken his
eparture.
He walked about the room, again trying to think.
Dr, perhaps, all thinking was over with him now, and
he was resolvin
begin to yield
could not brea
left to him.]
than what cam
felt now as thoi
ing on her bel
vantage; but s
servant' who cc
management to
persuade, but
had decided,
distasteful to h
amoor white.
“What are
“How to d
"You have
“I suppose
"How wil
form it?»
"Only pay
money, and I
would Cousin
he spoken hi
might not be
but, of course,
about his det
Only try me.

<#PG# 254>
3TSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
25
daughter's prayers were
Papa, let us see if we
n that assurance which
aly: "Papa, there never
le black sheep could be
such washing would on
would have to blush,–
erfect,—he must always
2-law; but he had been
aself of late, that there
and shame in this world
it not in itself a disgrace
h things as this cousin
that his daughter should
De her lover? And then
to hour, he remembered
the death of that son,
ve been such a glory to
sgrace! Was it not all
ld have wished that the
he was resolving in his own mind how best he mig)
begin to yield. He must obey his daughter. E
could not break the heart of the only child that w:
left to him. He had no delight in the world othe
than what came to him reflected back from her. E
felt now as though he was simply a steward endeavou
ing on her behalf to manage things to the best ac
vantage; but still only a steward, and as such only
servant' who could not at last decide on the mode
management to be adopted. He could endeavour t
persuade, but she must decide. Now his daughte
had decided, and he must begin this task, so utter]
distasteful to him, of endeavouring to wash the black
amoor white.
“What are you willing to do?” he asked.
“How to do, Sir Harry?”.
“You have led a bad life.”
“I suppose I have, Sir Harry.”
“How will you show yourself willing to re
form it?'s
. “Only pay my debts and set me up with read
money, and I'll go along as slick as grease!” Thr
would Cousin George have answered the question ha
he spoken his mind freely. But he knew that h
might not be so explicit. He must promise much
but, of course, in making his promise he must arrang
about his debts. “I'll do almost anything you like
Only try me. Of course it would be so much easie
away and leave it all,
Has he was placed his
of these troubles. He
everything should not
should have taken his
again trying to think.
er with him now, and

<#PG# 255>
252
did not discour
He must persevi
to Emily how :
gold there was
"She is atti
bear our name
If you will sub
prove that you
after years she
if those debts were paid off. I'll give up races alto-
gether, if you mean that, Sir Harry. Indeed, I'm
ready to give up anything.”
“Will you give up London?”
“London!” In simple truth, George did not quite
understand the proposition.
“Yes; will you leave London? Will you go and
- life at Scarrowby, and learn to look after the farm
and the place?”
George's face fell,—his face being less used to
lying than his tongue; but his tongue lied at once:
“Oh yes, certainly, if you wish it. I should rather
like a life of that sort. For how long would it be?”.
“For two years,” said Sir Harry, grimly.
Cousin George, in truth, did not understand. He
thought that he was to take his bride with him when
he went to Scarrowby. “Perhaps Emily would not
like it,” he said.
“It is what she desires. You do not suppose that
she knows so little of your past life as to be willing to
trust herself into your hands at once. She is attached
to you."
“And so am I to her; on my honour I am. I'm
sure you don't doubt that."
Sir Harry doubted every word that fell from his
cousin's mouth, but still he persevered. He could
perceive though he could not analyse, and there was
hardly a tone which poor Cousin George used which
"After year
“Yes, sir,
happiness of
such keeping
will find that s
"Oh, of ce
"I will pa
Boltby is satisi
George, as
he must pers
little account
matter of a
ranged when
from hand to
"I will p
to Scarrowby
you."
It wasn't
absolutely to

<#PG# 256>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
25
BY HOTSPUR
off. I'll give up races alto
t, Sir Harry. Indeed, I'm
idon?"
truth, George did not quite
London? Will you go and
rn to look after the farm
i face being less used to
his tongue lied at once:
wish it. I should rather
how long would it be?"
Er Harry, grimly.
did not understand. He
his bride with him when
erhaps Emily would not
did not discourage the Baronet. Still he persevered
He must persevere now, even if it were only to prow
to Emily how much of basest clay and how little
gold there was in this image.
“She is attached to you,” he continued, “and yo
bear our name, and will be the head of our family
If you will submit yourself to a reformed life, and wi
prove that you are fit for her, it may be possible tha
after years she should be your wife."
“After years, Sir Harry?”.
“Yes, sir,--after years. Do you suppose that th
happiness of such an one as she can be trusted t
such keeping as yours without a trial of you? Yo
will find that she has no such hope herself.”
“Oh, of course; what she likes "
“I will pay your debts; on condition that M
Boltby is satisfied that he has the entire list of them.
George, as he heard this, at once determined tha
he must persuade Mr. Hart to include Mr. Walker
little account in that due to himself. It was only
matter of a few hundreds, and might surely be aj
ranged when so much real money would be passin
from hand to hand.
... "I will pay everything; you shall then go dow
to Scarrowby, and the house shall be prepared fo
you."
It wasn't supposed, George thought, that he wa
absolutely to live in solitary confinement at Scarrowby
You do not suppose that
t life as to be willing to
once. She is attached
my honour I am, I'm
ord that fell from his
erseveret. He could
Calyse, and there was
George used which

<#PG# 257>
254
down to the
been a reconcil
and that the
the good the {
was packing
and paid it,-
not examine 1
was still a blat
"I wonde
thought Cousii
He might have a friend or two, and then the station
was very near.
“You are fond of shooting, and you will have
plenty of it there. We will get you made a magistrate
for the county, and there is much to do in looking
after the property.” Sir Harry became almost good-
humoured in his tone as he described the kind of life
which he intended that the blackamoor should live.
“We will come to you for a month each year, and
then you can come to us for a while.”
“When shall it begin?” asked Cousin George, as
soon as the Baronet paused. This was a question
difficult to be answered. In fact, the arrangement
must be commenced at once. Sir Harry knew very
well that, having so far yielded, he must take his
cousin back with him to Humblethwaite. He must
keep his cousin now in his possession till all those
debts should be paid, and till the house at Scarrowby
should be prepared; and he must trust to his daughter's
prudence and high sense of right not to treat her
Hover with too tender an acknowledgment of her love
till he should have been made to pass through the fire
of reform.
“You had better get ready and come back to
Humblethwaite with me now,” said Sir Harry.
Within five minutes after that there was bustling
about the passages and hall of the Crown Hotel.
Everybody in the house, from the august landlord

<#PG# 258>
Y HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
two, and then the station
down to the humble stableboy, knew that there hi
been a reconciliation between Sir Harry and his cousi
and that the cousin was to be made welcome to :
the good the gods could give. While Cousin Geor
was packing his things, Sir Harry called for the b
and paid it,—without looking at it, because he wou
not examine how the blackamoor had lived while ]
was still a blackamoor.
“I wonder whether he observed the brandy
thought Cousin George to himself.
Doting, and you will have
get you made a magistrate
is much to do in looking
arry became almost good
described the kind of life
3 blackamoor should live.
a month each year, and
a while."
asked Cousin George, as
1. This was a question
In fact, the arrangement
e. Sir Harry knew very
Ided, he must take his
imblethwaite. He must
possession till all those
the house at Scarrowby
ist trust to his daughter's
right not to treat her
wledgment of her love
o pass through the fire
v and come back to
id Sir Harry.
at there was bustling
f the Crown Hotel.
the august landlord

<#PG# 259>
256
CHAPTER XXI.
Emily Hotspur's Sermon.
THE greater portion of the journey back to Humble-
hwaite was passed in silence. Sir Harry had under-
aken an experiment in which he had no faith himself,
and was sad at heart. Cousin George was cowed,
nalf afraid, and yet half triumphant. Could it be pos-
sible that he should "pull through” after all? Some
hings had gone so well with him. His lady friends
nad been so true to him! Lady Altringham, and then
Mrs. Morton,-how good they had been! Dear Lucy!
le would never forget her. And Emily was such a -
orick! He was going to see his Emily, and that
vould be “so jolly.” Nevertheless, he did acknow-
edge to himself that an Emily prepared to assist her
eather in sending her lover through the fire of reform,
would not be altogether “so jolly” as the Emily who
nad leaned against him on the bridge at Airey Force,
while his arm had been tightly clasped round her
vaist. He was alive to the fact that romance must
rive place to business.
When they had entered the park-gates, Sir Harry
Joke. “You must understand, George”-he had not
called him Geo
been made knc
admitted here
might have bee
ferent."
“I see all t
“It is right
implicitly to E
priety. And n
that it may be
Then he p?
affection, at lea
"I'm sure i
calculating why
London for a 1
arrange that lit
suppose that ]
two years with
Sir Harry &
and desired
house. He ti
George had d
Elizabeth mig)
“My dear,
with me. W
Quick will ha
Sir Harry Hots

<#PG# 260>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
ER XXI.
I's Sermon.
e journey back to Humble
ce. Sir Harry had under
2 he had no faith himself,
usin George was cowed,
ophant. Could it be pos-
rough” after all? Some
I him. His lady friends
dy Altringham, and then
had been! Dear Lucy!
And Emily was such a
; his Emily, and that
heless, he did acknow-
prepared to assist her
ough the fire of reform,
lly" as the Emily who
bridge at Airey Force,
ly clasped round her
it that romance must
called him George before since the engagement ha
been made known to him—"that you cannot yet k
admitted here as my daughter's accepted suitor, i
might have been the case had your past life been di
ferent."
“I see all that,” said Cousin George.
“It is right that I should tell you so; but I tru
implicitly to Emily's high sense of duty and pro
priety. And now that you are here, George, I tru
that it may be for your advantage and for ours.”
Then he pressed his cousin's hand, if not wit
affection, at least with sincerity.
“I'm sure it is to be all right now," said George
calculating whether he would be able to escape t
London for a few days, so that he might be able t
arrange that little matter with Mr. Hart. They couldn
suppose that he would be able to leave London fo
two years without a day's notice!
Sir Harry got out of the carriage at the front door
and desired Cousin George to follow him into th
house. He turned at once into the small room wher
George had drunk the sherry, and desired that Lady
Elizabeth might be sent to him.
“My dear,” said he, “I have brought George bac)
with me. We will do the best that we can. Mrs
Quick will have a room for him. You had better tel
Sir Harry Hotspur.
17
park-gates, Sir Harry
eorge?--he had not

<#PG# 261>
258
She thanked
She would be
to deserve his k
Papa, don't thi
done quite at o
tion that her the
the hard part o
now the pleasar
happy and pers
“You had b
dearest, before
be less afterwar
Emily, and let her come to me for a moment before
she sees her cousin.” This was all said in George's
hearing. And then Sir Harry went, leaving his cousin
in the hands of Lady Elizabeth.
“I am glad to see you back again, George," she
said, with a melancholy voice.
Cousin George smiled, and said, that "it would
be all right.”
"I am sure I hope so, for my girl's sake. But
there must be a great change, George.”
“No end of a change,” said Cousin George, who
was not in the least afraid of Lady Elizabeth. .
Many things of moment had to be done in the
house that day before dinner. In the first place there
was a long interview between the father and daughter.
For a few minutes, perhaps, he was really happy
when she was kneeling with her arms upon his knees,
thanking him for what he had done, while tears of
joy were streaming down her cheeks. He would not
bring himself to say a word of caution to her. Would
it not be to paint the snow white to caution her as to
her conduct?
“I have done as you bade me in everything," he
said. “I have proposed to him that he should go to
Scarrowby. It may be that it will be your home for
a while, dear."
She kissed
to her mother's
well known to
her lover after
And there she
She would be
understand at
thorough, the :
ledge her love
but of lover's 1
almost none, -
gold should hay
had had her wa
had deserved it

<#PG# 262>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
o me for a moment before
is was all said in George's
Ty went, leaving his cousin
beth.
back again, George," she
ce.
She thanked him and kissed him again and agai
She would be so good. She would do all she cou
to deserve his kindness. And as for George,—“Pra
Papa, don't think that I suppose that it can be a
done quite at once.” Nevertheless it was in that dire
tion that her thoughts erred. It did seem to her th
the hard part of the work was already done, and tha
now the pleasant paths of virtue were to be trod wit
happy and persistent feet.
“You had better see him in your mother's presence
dearest, before dinner; and then the awkwardness wi
be less afterwards.”
and said, that "it would
, for my girl's sake. But
ge, George."
said Cousin George, who
of Lady Elizabeth.
at had to be done in the
er. In the first place there
en the father and daughter
aps, he was really happy
her arms upon his knees,
had done, while tears of
er cheeks. He would not
of caution to her. Would
white to caution her as to
She kissed him again, and ran from his room u
to her mother's apartment, taking some back stair
well known to herself, lest she should by chance mee
her lover after some undue and unprepared fashion
And there she could sit down and think of it all
She would be very discreet. He should be made tí
understand at once that the purgation must bı
thorough, the reform complete. She would acknow
ledge her love to him,-her great and abiding love
but of lover's tenderness there could be but little,-
almost none,-till the fire had done its work, and the
gold should have been separated from the dross. She
had had her way so far, and they should find that she
had deserved it.
e me in everything," he
im that he should go to
will be your home for

<#PG# 263>
260
way to conduct
thought to it till
entered the apar
She came up to
kiss, standing t
"George,”
that you are her
It was the fi
fire had done it:
done so much
easy and fairly
but muttered so
Before dinner Sir Harry wrote a letter to his
lawyer. The mail-cart passed through the village on
its way to Penrith late in the evening, and there was
time for him to save the post. He thought it in-
cumbent on him to let Mr. Boltby know that he had
changed his mind; and, though the writing of the
letter was not an agreeable task, he did it at once.
He said nothing to Mr. Boltby directly about his
daughter, but he made it known to that gentleman
that Cousin George was at present a guest at Humble-
thwaite, and that he intended to pay all the debts
without entering into any other specific engagements.
Would Mr. Boltby have the goodness to make out a
schedule of the debts? Captain Hotspur should be
instructed to give Mr. Boltby at once all the neces-
sary information by letter. Then Sir Harry went on
to say that perhaps the opinions formed in reference
to Captain Hotspur had been too severe. He was
ashamed of himself as he wrote these words, but still
they were written. If the blackamoor was to be
washed white, the washing must be carried out at all
times, at all seasons, and in every possible manner,
till the world should begin to see that the blackness
was going out of the skin.
Cousin George was summoned to meet the girl who
loved him in her mother's morning-room, before they
dressed for dinner. He did not know at all in what
fellow in the wc
could hardly bel
the daughter ex
bear himself gr
as a woman mi
it shall be assur
connected that
and, when wrc
forget in silence
either accepted
few words were
and the three st
The next da
Hall very quietly

<#PG# 264>
Y HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
26
urry wrote a letter to his
ssed through the village on
the evening, and there was
post. He thought it in-
6. Boltby know that he had
though the writing of the
e task, he did it at once.
Boltby directly about his
: known to that gentleman
present a guest at Humble.
nded to pay all the debts
other specific engagements.
de goodness to make out a
Captain Hotspur should be
aby at once all the neces-
Then Sir Harry went on
inions formed in reference
way to conduct himself. He had not given a moment
thought to it till the difficulty flashed upon him as sh
entered the apartment. But she had considered it af
She came up to him quickly, and gave him her lips t
kiss, standing there in her mother's presence.
"George,” she said, "dear George! I am so gla
that you are here."
It was the first; and it should be the last till the
fire had done its work; till the fire should at least hav
done so much of its work as to make the remainde
easy and fairly sure. He had little to say for himself
but muttered something about his being the happies
fellow in the world. It was a position in which a mar
could hardly behave well, and neither the mother noi
the daughter expected much from him. A man cannot
bear himself gracefully under the weight of a pardon
as a woman may do. A man chooses generally that
it shall be assumed by those with whom he is closely
connected that he has done and is doing no wrong ;
and, when wronged, he professes to forgive and to
forget in silence. To a woman the act of forgiveness,
either accepted or bestowed, is itself a pleasure. A
few words were then spoken, mostly by Lady Elizabeth,
and the three separated to prepare for dinner.
The next day passed over them at Humblethwaite
Hall very quietly, but with some mild satisfaction. Sir
een too severe. He was
rote these words, but still
blackamoor was to be
must be carried out at all
in every possible manner,
to see that the blackness
oned to meet the girl who
Orning-room, before they
not know at all in what

<#PG# 265>
262
Harry told his cousin of the letter to his lawyer, and
desired George to make out and send by that day's
post such a schedule as might be possible on the spur
of the moment.
“Hadn't I better run up and see Mr. Boltby?”
said Cousin George.
But to this Sir Harry was opposed. Let any calls
for money reach them there. Whatever the calls might
be, he at any rate could pay them. Cousin George
repeated his suggestion; but acquiesced when Sir Harry
frowned and showed his displeasure. He did make
out a schedule, and did write a letter to Mr. Boltby.
“I think my debt to Mr. Hart was put down as
3,250l.,” he wrote, “but I believe I should have added
another 350l. for a transaction as to which I fancy he
does not hold my note of hand. But the money is
reticent and qui
to be discreet, a
in her engagem
from being with
with theirs, did
cousin George.
assist, and take
that task of rei
now intent? Sh.
was at Scarrow
and Sir Harry
declared her pu
each other, an
third day, ther
walk, without
must show him
distance from t
be owned that
noon's amusen
sit down to 1
sermon, he wc
due."
. He was fool enough to think that Mr. Walker's
claim might be liquidated after this fashion. In the
afternoon they rode together,—the father, the daughter,
and the blackamoor, and much was told to Cousin
George as to the nature of the property. The names
of the tenants were mentioned, and the boundaries of
the farms were pointed out to him. He was thinking
all the time whether Mr. Hart would spare him.
But Emily Hotspur, though she had been thus
To be didi
of affection is
children, thoug
creates no sens
point out to th
to do so withc

<#PG# 266>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
26
TY HOTSPUR
the letter to his lawyer, and
out and send by that day's
ight be possible on the spur
up and see Mr. Boltby?"
as opposed. Let any calls
2. Whatever the calls might
Day them. Cousin George
acquiesced when Sir Harry
ispleasure. He did make
Ete a letter to Mr. Boltby.
r. Hart was put down as
elieve I should have added
on as to which I fancy he
hand. But the money is
reticent and quiet in her joy, though she was resolve
to be discreet, and knew that there were circumstance
in her engagement which would for a while deter he
from being with her accepted lover as other girls ar
with theirs, did not mean to estrange herself from he
cousin George. If she were to do so, how was she t
assist, and take, as she hoped to do, the first part i
that task of refining the gold on which they were a
now intent? She was to correspond with him when h
was at Scarrowby. Such was her present programme
and Sir Harry had made no objection when sh
declared her purpose. Of course they must understan
each other, and have communion together. On th
third day, therefore, it was arranged they two shoul-
walk, without other company, about the place. Sh
must show him her own gardens, which were at som
distance from the house. If the truth be told, it mus
be owned that George somewhat dreaded the after
noon's amusement; but had she demanded of him t
sit down to listen to her while she read to him
sermon, he would not have refused.
To be didactic and at the same time demonstrativ
of affection is difficult, even with mothers towards thei
children, though with them the assumption of authorit
creates no sense of injury. Emily specially desired t
point out to the erring one the paths of virtue, and ye
to do so without being oppressive.
think that Mr. Walker's
ter this fashion. In the
—the father, the daughter,
auch was told to Cousin
ne property. The names
7, and the boundaries of
- him. He was thinking
would spare him.
gh she had been thus

<#PG# 267>
264
“It is so nice to have you here, George,” she said.
“Yes, indeed; isn't it?” He was walking beside
her, and as yet they were within view of the house.
“Papa has been so good; isn't he good?”.
“Indeed he is. The best man I know out,” said
George, thinking that his gratitude would have been
stronger had the Baronet given him the money and
allowed him to go up to London to settle his own
debts.
“And Mamma has been so kind! Mamma is very
fond of you. I am sure she would do anything for
you.”
“And you?” said George, looking into her face.
“I!-As for me, George, it is a matter of course
now. You do not want to be told again what is and
ever must be my first interest in the world.”
“I do not care how often you tell me.”
“But you know it; don't you?”
“I know what you said at the waterfall, Emily.”
“What I said then I said for always. You may
be sure of that. I told Mamma so, and Papa. If they
had not wanted me to love you, they should not have
asked you to come here. I do love you, and I hope
that some day I may be your wife.”
She was not leaning on his arm, but as she spoke
she stopped,
put out his 1
shook her hes
I want to talk
so much, -n
be your wife.
wife.”
“What do
“Ever so
"But wh
know, as wel
I know Sir
pleasure. H
am to give i
at once? I
Of course
no idea of
with all her
the dross m
course you
jections."
“I know
and live at
He can't wa
"But he
“Why?”

<#PG# 268>
KY HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
you here, George,” she said.
?" He was walking beside
within view of the house.
od; isn't he good?"
best man I know out,” said
gratitude would have been
given him the money and
London to settle his own
so kind! Mamma is very
he would do anything for
she stopped, and looked stedfastly into his face.
put out his hand as though to take hers; but
shook her head, refusing it. “No, George; come
I want to talk to you a great deal. I want to say
· so much,now, to-day. I hope that some day I 1
be your wife. If I am not, I shall never be any mi
wife.”
“What does some day mean, Emily?”
“Ever so long;-years, perhaps.”
“But why? A fellow has to be consulted,
know, as well as yourself. What is the use of waiti.
I know Sir Harry thinks I have been very fond
pleasure. How can I better show him how willin
am to give it up than by marrying and settling do
at once? I don't see what's to be got by waiting?
Of course she must tell him the truth. She
no idea of keeping back the truth. She loved i
with all her heart, and was resolved to marry him;
the dross must first be purged from the gold.
course you know, George, that Papa has made
jections."
“I know he did, but that is over now. I am to
and live at Scarrowby at once, and have the shooti
He can't want me to remain there all by myself.”
“But he does; and so do I.”
“Why?”
fe, looking into her face.
1, it is a matter of course
be told again what is and
| in the world.”
you tell me."
you?"
the waterfall, Emily."
for always. You may
pa so, and Papa. If they
pu, they should not have
o love you, and I hope
wife."
arm, but as she spoke

<#PG# 269>
In order that he might be made clean by the fire
solitude and the hammer of hard work. She could
i quite say this to him. “You know, George, your
has been one of pleasure.”
“I was in the army,—for some years."
“But you left it, and you took to going to races,
d they say that you gambled and are in debt, and
u have been reckless. Is not that true, George?”.
"It is true.”
“And should you wonder that Papa should be
aid to trust his only child and all his property to
.e who,—who knows that he has been reckless? But
you can show, for a year or two, that you can give
- all that— "
“Wouldn't it be all given up if we were married?”.
“Indeed, I hope so. I should break my heart
herwise. But can you wonder that Papa should
Esh for some delay and some proof?”
“Two years!”
"Is that much? If I find you doing what he
ishes, these two years will be so happy to me! We
all come and see you, and you will come here. I
ave never liked Scarrowby, because it is not pretty,
- this place is; but, oh, how I shall like to go there
ow! And when you are here, Papa will get to be so
-nd of you. You will be like a real son to him.
nly you must be steady."
"Steady!
steady at Sca
liness of the
his nostrils.
She did n
not have ever
said, "that th
I told him tha
“Yes; Io
"It is he
much, that he
him, and you
"Oh, but
"It will b
you. I shall
that you have
and that you
and that the
betting, then
you somethin
“Somethi
“When I
to give me to
England. Is
not have it."
“Not giv
"I gave

<#PG# 270>
SPUR
made clean by the fire
nard work. She could
u know, George, you
me years."
cook to going to races,
and are in debt, and
that true, George?"
that Papa should be
nd all his property to
has been reckless? But
two, that you can give
“Steady! by Jove, yes. A fellow will have to
steady at Scarrowby.” The perfume of the cle
liness of the life proposed to him was not sweet
his nostrils.
She did not like this, but she knew that she co
not have everything at once. “You must know,"
said, “that there is a bargain between me and Pa
I told him that I should tell you everything.”
· “Yes; I ought to be told everything.”
"It is he that shall fix the day. He is to do
much, that he has a right to that. I shall never pi
him, and you must not.”
“Oh, but I shall."
“It will be of no use; and, George, I won't
you. I shall scold you if you do. When he thi
that you have learned how to manage the prope
and that your mind is set upon that kind of wo
and that there are no more races,--mind, and
betting, then,—then he will consent. And I will
you something more if you would like to hear it.”
“Something pleasant, is it?"
“When he does, and tells me that he is not afr
to give me to you, I shall be the happiest girl in
England. Is that pleasant?—No, George, no; I ,
not have it."
“Not give me one kiss?"
“I gave you one when you came, to show ,
) if we were married?"
hould break my heart
der that Papa should
proof?”
o happy te here."
you doing what he
so happy to me! We
ou will come here. I
cause it is not pretty,
shall like to go there
Papa will get to be so
e a real son to him.

<#PG# 271>
68
at in truth I loved you. I will give you another
hen Papa says that everything is right.”
“Not till then?”
"No, George, not till then. But I shall love
ou just the same. I cannot love you better than
do."
He had nothing for it but to submit, and was
bliged to be content during the remainder of their
ng walk with talking of his future life at Scarrowby.
was clearly her idea that he should be head-farmer,
ead-steward, head-accountant, and general workman
r the whole place. When he talked about the game,
ne brought him back to the plough;—so at least he
eclared to himself. And he could elicit no sympathy
om her when he reminded her that the nearest meet
:hounds was twenty miles and more from Scarrowby.
You can think of other things for a while,” she said.
e was obliged to say that he would, but it did seem
· him that Scarrowby was a sort of penal servitude
· which he was about to be sent with his own con-
irrence. The scent of the cleanliness was odious to
m.
“I don't know what I shall do there of an even-
g," he said.
“Read," she answered; "there are lots of books,
ad you can always have the magazines. I will send
em to you.” It was a very dreary prospect of life
for him, bu
absolutely u
When th
never could
earnest had
took anothe
him? Was :
Might it not
his other los
the Baronet
would have
to remembe
standing the
would have
He knew
been hers
fallen haple
herself to fi
It might ha
had been
that he wa
could not :
No doubt i
thwaite anc
Harry migh
Sir Harry
thought tha

<#PG# 272>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
EIOTSPUR
I will give you another
ng is right."
hen. But I shall love
t love you better than
ut to submit, and was
the remainder of their
future life at Scarrowby.
e should be head-farmer,
t, and general workman
e talked about the game,
plough;—so at least he
Could elicit no sympathy
er that the nearest meet
d more from Scarrowby.
s for a while,” she said.
would, but it did seem
sort of penal servitude
for him, but he could not tell her that it woul
absolutely unendurable.
When their walk was over,-a walk which
never could forget, however long might be her life
earnest had been her purpose,-he was left alone,
took another stroll by himself. How would it
him? Was it possible? Could the event “comec
Might it not have been better for him had he allo
his other loving friend to prepare for him the lette
the Baronet, in which Sir Harry's munificent
would have been accepted? Let us do him the ju:
to remember that he was quite incapable of un
standing the misery, the utter ruin which that I
would have entailed upon her who loved him so
He knew nothing of such sufferings as would i
been hers--as must be hers, for had she not alre
fallen haplessly into the pit when she had once allo
herself to fix her heart upon a thing so base as t
It might have been better, he thought, if that le
had been written. A dim dull idea came upon
that he was not fit to be this girl's husband.
could not find his joys where she would find h
No doubt it would be a grand thing to own Hum
thwaite and Scarrowby at some future time; but
Harry might live for these twenty years, and w
Sir Harry lived he must be a slave. And then
thought that upon the whole he liked Lucy Moi
ent with his own con-
anliness was odious to
do there of an even
re are lots of books,
igazines. - I will send
reary prospect of life

<#PG# 273>
70
etter than Emily Hotspur. He could say what he
2ose to Lucy, and smoke in her presence, own that
2 was fond of drink, and obtain some sympathy for
is “book” on the Derby. He began to feel already
hat he did not like sermons from the girl of his
eart.
But he had chosen this side now, and he must go
n with the game. It seemed certain to him that his
ebts would at any rate be paid. He was not at all
ertain how matters might go in reference to Mr.
Jalker, but if matters came to the worst the Baronet
could probably be willing to buy him off again with
ne promised income. Nevertheless, he was not com-
ortable, and certainly did not shine at Sir Harry's
able. “Why she has loved him, what she has seen
n him, I cannot tell,” said Sir Harry to his wife that
.ight.
We must presume Sir Harry did not know how it
; that the birds pair.
On the n
Humblethwai
The post rea
time at whic
letters were t
letter of whic
the reader en
"MY DEA
your letter i
and have als
of what he s
difficulty in
if you think
judge at pre
five and thir
the former
the amount
You must
the correctn

<#PG# 274>
OTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE,
He could say what he
her presence, own that
otain some sympathy for
He began to feel already
es from the girl of bis
CHAPTER XXII.
George Hotspur yields.
He now, and he must go
certain to him that his
aid. He was not at all
go in reference to Mr.
10 the worst the Baronet
buy him off again with
Cheless, he was not com-
hot shine at Sir Harry's
him, what she has seen
ir Harry to his wife that
On the morning of Cousin George's fourth da:
Humblethwaite, there came a letter for Sir Ha
The post reached the Hall about an hour before
time at which the family met for prayers, and
letters were taken into Sir Harry's room. The spe
letter of which mention is here made shall be giver
the reader entire:-
y did not know how it
" , LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS
“24th Nov. I
“MY DEAR SIR. HARRY HOTSPUR,-I have recei
your letter in reference to Captain Hotspur's de
and have also received a letter from him, and a
of what he says he owes. Of course there can be
difficulty in paying all debts which he acknowledg
if you think proper to do so. As far as I am able
judge at present, the amount would be between twer.
five and thirty thousand pounds. I should say nea
the former than the latter sum, did I not know t
the amount in such matters always goes on increasi
You must also understand that I cannot guaran
the correctness of this statement,

<#PG# 275>
72
“But I feel myself bound in my duty to go further
han this, even though it may be at the risk of your
ispleasure. I presume from what you tell me that
ou are contemplating a marriage between George
Iotspur and your daughter; and I now repeat to you,
n the most solemn words that I can use, my assur-
nce that the marriage is one which you should not
countenance. Captain Hotspur is not fit to marry
Four daughter.”
When Sir Harry had read so far he had become
Fery angry, but his anger was now directed against
his lawyer. Had he not told Mr. Boltby that he had
changed his mind; and what business had the lawyer
co interfere with him further? But he read the letter
on to its bitter end:-
“Since you were in London the following facts
have become known to me. On the second of last
month Mr. George Hotspur met two men, named
Walker and Bullbean, in the lodgings of the former,
at about nine in the evening, and remained there dur-
ing the greater part of the night, playing cards. Bull-
bean is a man well known to the police as a card-
sharper. He once moved in the world as a gentleman.
His trade is now to tout and find prey for gamblers.
Walker is a young man in a low rank of life, who
had some money. George Hotspur on that night won
between three and four hundred pounds of Walker's
money; and I
himself some
is now prepare
stances of this
out, or been ir
was used again
evidence as to
hitherto been
met. Hart fea
public, his bills
“I think the
conceive that I
family, you ha
yourself into the
can still trust
should recomm
you,-if he wil
"I grieve to
me that no sac
ject of averting
spur is bringin
I am, very fait
It was a te
and re-read it,
that he might
Sir Harry Hotspn

<#PG# 276>
FOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
in my duty to go further
sy be at the risk of your
what you tell me that
carriage between George
and I now repeat to you,
hat I can use, my assur-
he which you should not
spur is not fit to marry
d so far he had become
was now directed against
Mr. Boltby that he had
business had the lawyer
But he read the letter
money; and Bullbean, over and above this, got
himself some considerable amount of plunder. Wall
is now prepared, and very urgent, to bring the circu.
stances of this case before a magistrate, having fou
out, or been informed, that some practice of cheatis
was used against him; and Bullbean is ready to gi
evidence as to George Hotspur's foul play. They ha-
hitherto been restrained by Hart, the Jew whom yo
met. Hart fears that were the whole thing mac
public, his bills would not be taken up by you.
“I think that I know all this to be true. If yo
conceive that I am acting in a manner inimical to you
family, you had better come up to London and pu
yourself into the hands of some other lawyer. If you
can still trust me, I will do the best I can for you.
should recommend you to bring Captain Hotspur with
you,—if he will come.
“I grieve to write as I have done, but it seems to
me that no sacrifice is too great to make with the ob-
ject of averting the fate to which, as I fear, Miss Hot-
spur is bringing herself.—My dear Sir Harry Hotspur
I am, very faithfully yours,
"JOHN BOLTBY.”
hdon the following facts
1 On the second of last
met two men, named
lodgings of the former,
and remained there dur-
fht, playing cards. Bull-
to the police as a card-
le world as a gentleman.
find prey for gamblers
low rank of life, who
|tspur on that night won
fred pounds of Walker's
It was a terrible letter! Gradually, as he read it
and re-read it, there came upon Sir Harry the feeling
that he might owe, that he did owe, that he certainly
Sir Harry Hotspur.
18

<#PG# 277>
274
as George was
towards the f
The letter had
turned round
and when he
standing the
which it conta
suppose it is
facing his ener
would owe to Mr. Boltby a very heavy debt of grati-
tude. Gradually the thin glazing of hope with which
he had managed to daub over and partly to hide his
own settled convictions as to his cousin's character fell
away, and he saw the man as he had seen him during
his interview with Captain Stubber and Mr. Hart. It
must be so. Let the consequences be what they might,
his daughter must be told. Were she to be killed by
the telling, it would be better than that she should be
handed over to such a man as this. The misfortune
which had come upon them might be the death of him
and of her;- but better that than the other. He sat
in his chair till the gong sounded through the house
for prayers; then he rang his bell and sent in word to
Lady Elizabeth that she should read them in his
absence. When they were over, word was brought
that he would breakfast alone, in his own room. On
receiving that message, both his wife and daughter
went to him; but as yet he could tell them nothing.
Tidings had come which would make it necessary that
he should go at once to London. As soon as break-
fast should be over he would see George Hotspur.
They both knew from the tone in which the name
was pronounced that the “tidings" were of their nature
bad, and that they had reference to the sins of their
guest.
“You had better read that letter," he said as soon
“I did win
“And you
"Oh dear
But his cor
heard in his
motion of his
accusation in
create belief.
"He must?
"I had prc
“Has it be
pay back mo?
scoundrel,-a
your way into
offers to buy
made no sort
had he not a
that he should

<#PG# 278>
TOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
very heavy debt of gratis
zing of hope with which
er and partly to hide his
his cousin's character fell
us he had seen him during
stubber and Mr. Hart. It
lences be what they might,
Were she to be killed by
er than that she should be
2 as this. The misfortune
might be the death of him
it than the other. He sat
ounded through the house
is bell and sent in word to
should read them in his
: over, word was brought
ne, in his own room. On
»th his wife and daughter
e could tell them nothing.
vuld make it necessary that
as George was in the room. As he spoke his face
towards the fire, and in that position he remain
The letter had been in his hand, and he only h
turned round to give it. George read the letter slow
and when he had got through it, only half unde
standing the words, but still knowing well the char,
which it contained, stood silent, utterly conquered.
suppose it is true?” said Sir Harry, in a low voic
facing his enemy.
“I did win some money,” said Cousin George.
“And you cheated?”
“Oh dear no;-nothing of the sort.”
But his confession was written in his face, and wa
heard in his voice, and peeped out through ever
motion of his limbs. He was a cur, and denied th
accusation in a currish manner, hardly intended to
create belief.
“He must be paid back his money,” said Sir Harry
"I had promised that,” said Cousin George.
“Has it been your practice, sir, when gambling, to
pay back money that you have won? You are i
scoundrel,- a heartless scoundrel,--to try and makt
your way into my house when I had made such libera
offers to buy your absence. To this Cousin George
made no sort of answer. The game was up. Ang
had he not already told himself that it was a gamı
that he should never have attempted to play? “We
indon. As soon as break-
suld see George Hotspur.
tone in which the name
lings" were of their nature
rence to the sins of their
at letter," he said as soon
18*

<#PG# 279>
276
whom her wc
Papa's, and,
with majesty tI
On the day
from Sir Harr
telling her the
common low s
cards, robbing
station, of hur
about it. It is
be tried before
creature viler, I
cannot conceit
will leave this house if you please, both of us, at eleven.
We will go to town together. The carriage will be
ready at eleven. You had better see to the packing
of your things, with the servant."
“Shall I not say a word of adieu to Lady Elizabeth?”
“No, sir! You shall never speak to a female in
my house again.”
The two were driven over to Penrith together, and
went up to London in the same carriage, Sir Harry
paying for all expenses without a word. Sir Harry
before he left his house saw his wife for a moment,
but he did not see his daughter. “Tell her," said
he, “that it must be,-must be all over." The de-
cision was told to Emily, but she simply refused to
accept it. “It shall not be so," said she, flashing out.
Lady Elizabeth endeavoured to show her that her father
had done all he could to further her views-had been
ready to sacrifice to her all his own wishes and con-
victions.
“Why is he so changed? He has heard of some
new debt. Of course there are debts. We did not
suppose that it could be done all at once, and so
easily.” She refused to be comforted, and refused to
believe. She sat alone weeping in her own room, and
swore, when her mother came to her, that no con-
sideration, no tidings as to George's past misconduct,
should induce her to break her faith to the man to
darling must be
what she will s
by it as she.
such as this.
cided without
The letter was
almost by hea
of abject agon
youth and bea
She did not lo
said that no m
too far gone
would wait.
She would be

<#PG# 280>
I HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
please, both of us, at eleven.
her. The carriage will be
I better see to the packing
vant."
of adieu to Lady Elizabeth?"
never speak to a female in
ver to Penrith together, and
e same carriage, Sir Harry
vithout a word. Sir Harry
aw his wife for a moment,
aughter. “Tell her," said
sust be all over.” The de
but she simply refused to
2 50," said she, flashing out
d to show her that her father
urther her views_had been
'I his own wishes and con-
whom her word had been given;"my word, a
Papa's, and yours," said Emily, pleading her car
with majesty through her tears.
On the day but one following there came a let:
from Sir Harry to Lady Elizabeth, very short, b
telling her the whole truth. “He has cheated like
common low swindler as he is, with studied tricks
cards, robbing a poor man, altogether beneath him
station, of hundreds of pounds. There is no doul
about it. It is uncertain even yet whether he will no
be tried before a jury. He hardly even denies it.
creature viler, more cowardly, worse, the mind of ma:
cannot conceive. My broken-hearted, dearest, bes
darling must be told all this. Tell her that I know
what she will suffer. Tell her that I shall be as crusher
by it as she. But anything is better than degradation
such as this. Tell her specially that I have not de.
cided without absolute knowledge.” Emily was told
The letter was read to her and by her till she knew it
almost by heart. There came upon her a wan look
of abject agony, that seemed to rob her at once of her
youth and beauty; but even now she would not yield.
She did not longer affect to disbelieve the tidings, but
said that no man, let him do what he might, could be
too far gone for repentance and forgiveness. She
would wait. She had talked of waiting two years.
She would be content to wait ten. What though he
d? He has heard of some
e are debts. We did not
done all at once, and so
comforted, and refused to
ving in her own room, and
ime to her, that no con-
George's past misconduct,
her faith to the man to

<#PG# 281>
278
together, but th
and slept for t
roof.
Cousin Geo
being still in
named; but at
had cheated at cards! Had she not once told her
mother that should it turn out that he had been a
murderer, then she would become a murderer's wife?
She did not know that cheating at cards was worse
than betting at horse-races. It was all bad, -very bad.
It was the kind of life into which men were led by
the fault of those who should have taught them better.
No; she would not marry him without her father's
leave: but she would never own that her engagement
was broken, let them affix what most opprobrious name
to him they might choose. To her card-sharpers seemed
to be no worse than gamblers. She was quite sure
that Christ had come to save men who cheat at cards
as well as others.
; As Sir Harry and his cousin entered the London
station late at night,-it was past midnight, Sir Harry
bade his companion meet him the next morning at
Mr. Boltby's chambers at eleven. Cousin George had
had ample time for meditation, and had considered
that it might be best for him to cut up a little rough.".
“Mr. Boltby is my enemy," he said, “and I don't
know what I am to get by going there."
"If you don't, sir, I'll not pay one shilling for you."
“I have your promise, Sir Harry."
“If you are not there at the time I fix, I will pay
nothing, and the name may go to the dogs.".
Then they both went to the station hotel,--not
For the pre
was at the lawy
Mr. Boltby smp
had been giver
Harry had ack
over and over
no daughter, ti
was almost in
Sir Harry in a
“We must
"I don't e
thing. And I
“Ah, but
then those ci
had better bu
Stick to your
to a legacy, a
shall find him
Sir Harry
ceived back

<#PG# 282>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
KY HOTSPUR
Had she not once told her
in out that he had been a
become a murderer's wife?
heating at cards was worse
. It was all bad,—very bad.
to which men were led by
ild have taught them better.
✓ him without her father's
· own that her engagement
what most opprobrious name
To her card-sharpers seemed
blers. She was quite sure
ve men who cheat at cards
together, but the younger following the elder's feet,
and slept for the last time in their lives under o
roof.
Cousin George did not show himself at Mr. Boltby
being still in his bed at the station hotel at the tir
named; but at three o'clock he was with Mrs. Morto
For the present we will go back to Sir Harry. E
was at the lawyer's chambers at the time named, ai
Mr. Boltby smiled when told of the summons whic
had been given to Cousin George. By this times
Harry had acknowledged his gratitude to Mr. Boltz
over and over again, and Mr. Boltby perhaps, havir
no daughter, thought that the evil had been cured. F
was almost inclined to be jocular, and did laugh
Sir Harry in a mild way when told of the threat. .
“We must pay his debts, Sir Harry, I think.”
“I don't see it at all. I would rather face every
thing. And I told him that I would pay nothing.”
“Ah, but you had told him that you would. An
then those cormorants have been told so also. W
had better build a bridge of gold for a falling enemy
Stick to your former proposition, without any referenc
to a legacy, and make him write the letter. My cler
shall find him to-morrow.”
Sir Harry at last gave way; the lucky Walker re
ceived back his full money, Bullbean's wages of in
cousin entered the London
s past midnight, -Sir Harry
him the next morning at
even. Cousin George had
.tion, and had considered
a to cut up a little rough."
!y," he said, "and I don't
going there."
I pay one shilling for you."
ir Harry."
the time I fix, I will pay
go to the dogs."
) the station hotel, -not

<#PG# 283>
280
A paper to 1
The truth is,
Could she beli
could she thir
iquity and all; and Sir Harry returned to Humble-
thwaite.
Cousin George was sitting in Mrs. Morton's room
with a very bad headache five days after his arrival
in London, and she was reading over a manuscript
which she had just written. “That will do, I think,”
she said.
“Just the thing," said he, without raising his head.
“Will you copy it now, George?”
“Not just now, I am so seedy. I'll take it and do
it at the club.”
“No; I will not have that. The draft would cer-
tainly be left out on the club table; and you would go
to billiards, and the letter never would be written.”
“I'll come back and do it after dinner.”
“I shall be at the theatre then, and I won't have
you here in my absence. Rouse yourself and do it
now. Don't be such a poor thing."
“That's all very well, Lucy; but if you had a sick
headache, you wouldn't like to have to write a
d d
letter like that."
Then she rose up to scold him, being determined
that the letter should be written then and there.
“Why, what a coward you are; what a feckless, use-
less creature! Do you think that I have never to go
for hours on the stage, with the gas in a blaze around
me, and my head ready to split? And what is this?
him?
"You say
never cared fo
“You wou
“No, by G
wide awake ei
situated as I a
to an old tit
together. Fa
suppose; but,
I've had eno
know, Lucy,
my life.”
He was
gift; idle, sel
She was a
capable of s
loving truth
a word as t
for the mon
and droppe
which she ne
eau-de-colog

<#PG# 284>
Y HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
Harry returned to Humble.
tting in Mrs. Morton's room
ne five days after his arrival
reading over a manuscript
“That will do, I think,"
Ele, without raising his head.
George?"
seedy. I'll take it and do
hat. The draft would cer-
ab table; and you would go
never would be written.”
it after dinner.”
tre then, and I won't have
Rouse yourself and do it
= thing."
icy; but if you had a sick
to have to write a dead
A paper to write that will take you ten minut
The truth is, you don't like to give up the gir
Could she believe it of him after knowing him so we
could she think that there was so much of good
him?
“You say that to annoy me. You know that
never cared for her."
“You would marry her now if they would let you
“No, by George. I've had enough of that. You
wide awake enough to understand, Lucy, that a fello
situated as I am, over head and ears in debt, and h
to an old title, should struggle to keep the thin
together. Families and names don't matter much,
suppose; but, after all, one does care for them. E
I've had enough of that. As for Cousin Emily, y
know, Lucy, I never loved any woman but you
my life.”
He was a brute, unredeemed by any one mar
gift; idle, self-indulgent, false, and without a princip
She was a woman greatly gifted, with many virtue
capable of self-sacrifice, industrious, affectionate, ai
loving truth if not always true herself. And yet su
a word as that from this brute sufficed to please h
for the moment. She got up and kissed his forehea
and dropped for him some strong spirit in a glas
which she mixed with water, and cooled his brow wit
eau-de-cologne. “Try to write it, dearest. It shoui
id him, being determined
written then and there.
re; what a feckless, use
i that I have never to go
he gas in a blaze around
plit? And what is this?

<#PG# 285>
282
be written at once if it is to be written.” Then he
turned himself wearily to her writing-desk, and copied
the words which she had prepared for him.
The letter was addressed to Mr. Boltby, and pur-
ported to be a renunciation of all claim to Miss Hot-
spur's hand, on the understanding that his debts were
paid for him to the extent of 25,000l., and that an
allowance were made to him of 500l. a year, settled
on him as an annuity for life, as long as he should
live out of England. Mr. Boltby had given him to
understand that this clause would not be exacted,
unless circumstances should arise which should make
Sir Harry think it imperative upon him to demand its
execution. The discretion must be left absolute with
Sir Harry; but, as Mr. Boltby said, Captain Hotspur
could trust Sir Harry's word and his honour.
"If I'm to be made to go abroad, what the devil
are you to do?” he had said to Mrs. Morton..
. “There need be no circumstances,” said Mrs. Mor-
ton, “to make it necessary.” **
Of course Captain Hotspur accepted the terms on
her advice. He had obeyed Lady Altringham, and
had tried to obey Emily, and would now obey Mrs.
Morton, because Mrs. Morton was the nearest to him.
The letter which he copied was a well-written letter,
put together with much taste, so that the ignoble
compact to which it gave assent should seem to be as
little ignoble
the arrangemi
"because I th
property and
that my posit
that should I
have failed,
made happy
fully entitled
that the word
He did not 1
that the writ
whom he ha
did convey
give,—not
different,
all that?” h
"Certai
and talk of
"Oh de
“This
matter sim
"I belie
himself up
he continuo
"I will
"And

<#PG# 286>
'Y HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
to be written." Then he
er writing-desk, and copied
repared for him.
d to Mr. Boltby, and pure
i of all claim to Miss Hot-
anding that his debts were
of 25,0001., and that an
n of 500l. a year, settled
ife, as long as he should
Boltby had given him to
would not be exacted,
arise which should make
upon him to demand its
nust be left absolute with
Jy said, Captain Hotspur
and his honour.
) abroad, what the devil
to Mrs. Morton.
stances," said Mrs. Mor
little ignoble as might be possible. “I entered
the arrangement,” the letter said in its last paragra
“because I thought it right to endeavour to keep
property and the title together; but I am aware
that my position in regard to my debts was of a na-
that should have deterred me from the attempt.
have failed, I sincerely hope that my cousin may
made happy by some such splendid alliance as sh
fully entitled to expect.” He did not understand
that the words conveyed; but yet he questioned the
He did not perceive that they were intended to im
that the writer had never for a moment loved the
whom he had proposed to marry. Nevertheless tl
did convey to him dimly some idea that they mi
give, -not pain, for as to that he would have been
different,--but offence. “Will there be any good
all that?” he asked.
“Certainly,” said she. “You don't mean to wh
and talk of your broken heart.”
“Oh dear, no; nothing of that sort.”
“This is the manly way to put it, regarding 1
matter simply as an affair of business."
“I believe it is,” said he; and then, having pick
himself up somewhat by the aid of a glass of sher
he continued to copy the letter, and to direct it.
"I will keep the rough draft," said Mrs. Morton
“And I must go now, I suppose,” he said.
· accepted the terms or
Lady Altringham, and
would now obey Mrs.
was the nearest to him.
was a well-written letter,
so that the ignoble
t should seem to be as

<#PG# 287>
284
woman who was
and Bullbean.
that ignorance.
Cousin Geoi
would amend !
see Lady Teazle
now back in to
soy
“You can stay here and see me eat my dinner if
you like. I shall not ask you to share it, because it
consists of two small mutton chops, and one wouldn't
keep me up through Lady Teazle.”
“I've a good mind to come and see you," said he.
“Then you'd better go and eat your own dinner
at once.”
“I don't care about my dinner. I should have a
bit of supper afterwards."
Then she preached to him a sermon; not quite
such a one as Emily Hotspur had preached, but much
more practical, and with less reticence. 'If he went on
living as he was living now, he would “come to grief.”
He was drinking every day, and would some day find
that he could not do so with impunity. Did he know
what delirium tremens was? Did he want to go to
the devil altogether? Had he any hope as to his future
life?
“Yes,” said he, “I hope to make you my wife.”
She tossed her head, and told him that with all the
will in the world to sacrifice herself, such sacrifice
could do him no good if he persisted in making him-
self a drunkard. “But I have been so tried these last
two months. If you only knew what Mr. Boltby and
Captain Stubber and Sir Harry and Mr. Hart were
altogether. Oh, my G~!” But he did not say a
word about Messrs. Walker and Bullbean. The poor

<#PG# 288>
OTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
see me eat my dinner if
u to share it, because it
chops, and one wouldn't
woman who was helping him knew nothing of Wal
and Bullbean. Let us hope that she may remain
that ignorance.
Cousin George, before he left her, swore that
would amend his mode of life, but he did not go
see Lady Teazle that night. There were plenty of m.
now back in town ready to play pool at the club.
azle."
ne and see you," said he.
nd eat your own dinner
linner. I should have a
m a sermon; not quite
had preached, but much
reticence. If he went on
e would “come to grief."
und would some day find
Empunity. Did he know
Did he want to go to
iny hope as to his future
to make you my wife.”
3 him that with all the
herself, such sacrifice
ersisted in making him
been so tried these last
- what Mr. Boltby and
and Mr. Hart were
at he did not say a
Bullbean. The poor

<#PG# 289>
286
CHAPTER XXIII.
life, he had
name?
It would
waited till t]
returned hom
thwaite, the
prove to Em
his arrival, v
held out in
that scene at
I shall never be married.
SIR HARRY HOTSPUR returned to Humblethwaite
before Cousin George's letter was written, though when
he did return all the terms had been arranged, and a
portion of the money paid. Perhaps it would have
been better that he should have waited and taken the
letter with him in his pocket; but in truth he was so
wretched that he could not wait. The thing was fixed
and done, and he could but hurry home to hide his
face among his own people. He felt that the glory of
his house was gone from him. He would sit by the
hour together thinking of the boy who had died. He
had almost, on occasions, allowed himself to forget his
boy, while hoping that his name and wide domains
might be kept together by the girl that was left to him.
He was beginning to understand now that she was
already but little better than a wreck. Indeed, was
not everything shipwreck around him? Was he not
going to pieces on the rocks? Did not the lesson of
every hour seem to tell him that, throughout his long
her lover hi
After that all
There was a
not fail to a
had once ta
his inferior
good in all
this or that
brandy-drin
with any w
he was as
Saviour co
His great
not her bi
which His
Every real
argument.

<#PG# 290>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
XXIII.
be married.
eturned to Humblethwaite
was written, though wher
nad been arranged, and a
Perhaps it would have
have waited and taken the
t; but in truth he was so
ait. The thing was fixed
it hurry home to hide his
He felt that the glory of
m. He would sit by the
boy who had died. He
wed himself to forget his
ame and wide domains
girl that was left to him.
and now that she was
a wreck. Indeed, was
nd him? Was he not
Did not the lesson of
it, throughout his long
life, he had thought too much of his house and
name?
It would have been better that he should
waited till the letter was in his pocket before
returned home, because, when he reached Hum
thwaite, the last argument was wanting to him
prove to Emily that her hope was vain. Even a
his arrival, when the full story was told to her,
held out in her resolve. She accepted the truth
that scene at Walker's rooms. She acknowledged 1
her lover had cheated the wretched man at cai
After that all other iniquities were of course. as nothi
There was a completeness in that of which she
not fail to accept, and to use the benefit. When
had once taken it as true that her lover had robb
his inferior by foul play at cards, there could be
good in alluding to this or that lie, in counting
this or that disreputable debt, in alluding to habits
brandy-drinking, or even in soiling her pure mi
with any word as to Mrs. Morton. It was granted t
he was as vile as sin could make him. Had not
Saviour come exactly for such as this one, because
His great love for those who were vile; and sho
not her human love for one enable her to do tl
which His great heavenly love did always for all me
Every reader will know how easily answerable was t
argument. Most readers will also know how hard

<#PG# 291>
288
course he woul
Of course he w
him. What else
decently withou
happened to hi
live as a gentle
he was the pers
father, in his coi
is to win by attacking the reason when the heart is
the fortress that is in question. She had accepted his
guilt, and why tell her of it any further? Did she not
pine over his guilt, and weep for it day and night,
and pray that he might yet be made white as snow?
But guilty as he was, a poor piece of broken vilest
clay, without the properties even which are useful to
the potter, he was as dear to her as when she had
leaned against him believing him to be a pillar of
gold set about with onyx stones, jaspers, and rubies.
There was but one sin on his part which could divide
them. If, indeed, he should cease to love her, then
there would be an end to it! It would have been
better that Sir Harry should have remained in London
till he could have returned with George's autograph
letter in his pocket.
“You must have the letter in his own handwriting,"
Mr. Boltby had said, cunningly, “only you must return
it to me.”
Sir Harry had understood, and had promised, that
the letter should be returned when it had been used
for the cruel purpose for which it was to be sent to
Humblethwaite. For all Sir Harry's own purposes Mr.
Boltby's statements would have quite sufficed.
She was told that her lover would renounce her,
but she would not believe what she was told. Of
towards her, co
all these argume
tion over and
unworthy of he
as nothing. Th
“He is false
“And am I
love me better
And even that
love him. Im
I do so. But
Poor Lady
useless. Her
ness was as t
hither and thi
disgraceful. F
cousin, as mat
she assented.
Sir Harry House

<#PG# 292>
FOTSPUR
21
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
reason when the heart is
n. She had accepted his
any further? Did she not
ep for it day and night
- be made white as snow?
por piece of broken viest
even which are useful to
- to her as when she bad
g him to be a pillar of
ones, jaspers, and subies.
is part which could divide
Id cease to love her, then
it! It would have been
have remained in London
with George's autograph
course he would accept the payment of his deb
Of course he would take an income when offered
him. What else was he to do? How was he to li'
decently without an income? All these evils ha
happened to him because he had been expected 1
live as a gentleman without proper means. In fac
he was the person who had been most injured. He
father, in his complete, in his almost abject tendernes
towards her, could not say rough words in answer t
all these arguments. He could only repeat his asser
tion over and over again that the man was utter)
unworthy of her, and must be discarded. It was al
as nothing. The man must discard himself.
“He is false as hell,” said Sir Harry.
“And am I to be as false as hell also? Will you
love me better when I have consented to be untrue
And even that would be a lie. I do love him. I must
love him. I may be more wicked than he is, because
I do so. But I do."
Poor Lady Elizabeth in these days was worse than
useless. Her daughter was so strong that her weak-
ness was as the weakness of water. She was driven
hither and thither in a way that she herself felt to be
disgraceful. When her husband told her that the
cousin, as matter of course, could never be seen again,
she assented. When Emily implored her to act as
Sir Harry Hotspur.
in his own handwriting,"
?, "only you must return
and had promised, that
when it had been used
ch it was to be sent to
rry's own purposes Mr.
quite sufficed.
would renounce her,
at she was told. Of
19

<#PG# 293>
290.
points. “It ha
him credit for."
“I don't sup
Elizabeth.
“Nor for ar
himself. I won
for him."
mediator with her father on behalf of the wicked
cousin, she again assented. And then, when she was
alone with Sir Harry, she did not dare to do as she
had promised.
“I do think it will kill her,” she said to Sir Harry.
“We must all die, but we need not die disgraced,”
he said.
It was a most solemn answer, and told the thoughts
which had been dwelling in his mind. His son hadi
gone from him; and now it might be that his daughter
must go too, because she could not survive the dis-
appointment of her young love. He had learned to
think that it might be so as he looked at her great
grave eyes, and her pale cheeks, and her sorrow-laden
mouth. It might be so; but better that for them all
than that she should be contaminated by the touch of
a thing so vile as this cousin. She was pure as snow,
. clear as a star, lovely as the opening rosebud. As she
was, let her go to her grave,-if it need be so. For
himself, he could die too,mor even live if it were
required of him! Other fathers, since Jephtha and
Agamemnon, have recognised it as true that heaven
has demanded from them their daughters.
The letter came, and was read and re-read by Sir
Harry before he showed it to his child. He took it
also to his wife, and explained it to her in all its
"Surely Mr.
"I don't kn
rid us from wha
I don't think it
a letter out of h
"But does it
“Not in the
his signature.
same thing. It
he had not ever
For a whil
entrust to his
Emily. He wc
himself! But as
· Lady Elizabeth
matter fully to
so much strong
that must be dic
the evening of

<#PG# 294>
HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
· 29
on behalf of the wicked
And then, when she was
Hid not dare to do as she
er," she said to Sir Harry
we need not die disgraced,"
swer, and told the thoughts
in his mind. His son had
- might be that his daughter
could not survive the dis-
love. He had learned to
as he looked at her great
eeks, and her sorrow-laden
put better that for them all
ntaminated by the touch of
n. She was pure as snow,
opening rosebud. As she
e,-if it need be so. For
-or even live if it were
thers, since Jephtha and
ed it as true that heaven
eir daughters.
s read and re-read by Sir
to his child. He took it
Ened it to her in all its
points. “It has more craft," said he, “than I gav
him credit for."
“I don't suppose he ever cared for her," said Lad
Elizabeth.
“Nor for any human being that ever lived,-sav
himself. I wonder whether he got Boltby to write i
for him.”
“Surely Mr. Boltby wouldn t have done that.”
“I don't know. I think he would do anything to
rid us from what he believed to have been our danger
I don't think it was in George Hotspur to write such
a letter out of his own head.”
“But does it signify?”
“Not in the least. It is his own handwriting and
his signature. Whoever formed the words, it is the
same thing. It was needed only to prove to her that
he had not even the merit of being true to her.”
For a while Sir Harry thought that he would
entrust to his wife the duty of showing the letter to
Emily. He would so willingly have escaped the task
himself! But as he considered the matter he feared that
· Lady Elizabeth might lack the firmness to explain the
matter fully to the poor girl. The daughter would be
so much stronger than the mother, and thus the thing
that must be done would not be effected! At last, on
the evening of the day on which the letter had reached
19*

<#PG# 295>
292
him, he sent for her, and read it to her. She heard it
without a word. Then he put it into her hands, and
she read the sentences herself, slowly, one after
another, endeavouring as she did so to find arguments
by which she might stave off the conclusion to
which she knew that her father would attempt to bring
her.
"It must be all over now," said he at last.
She did not answer him, but gazed into his face
with such a look of woe that his heart was melted.
She had found no argument. There had not been in
the whole letter one word of love for her.
“My darling, will it not be better that we should
meet the blow?”
“I have met it, all along. Some day, perhaps, he
might be different.”
“In what way, dearest? He does not even profess
to hope so himself.”
“That gentleman in London, Papa, would have
paid nothing for him unless he wrote like this. He
had to do it. Papa, you had better just leave me
to myself. I will not trouble you by mentioning his
name."
“But Emily "
“Well, Papa?”
“Mamma al
alone."
“I must suf
now and think :
have always dor
He did not
was with her in
talking about
could not be av
self said of the
not once allude
As the man was
name, and as he
not some almost
salvation? Sure!
they all made it
"It must be
said.
Lady Elizab
was no side on
poor girl hersel
80. As she tho
though they w
could pray for 1
--that to him
are of avail.

<#PG# 296>
RY HOTSPUR
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
29
read it to her. She heard i
e put it into her hands, and
herself, slowly, one after
she did so to find arguments
ave off the conclusion to
ither would attempt to bring
)w," said he at last.
m, but gazed into his face
that his heart was melted
it. There had not been in
Of love for her.
ot be better that we should
“Mamma and I cannot bear that you should suffe
alone."
“I must suffer, and silence is the easiest. I will go
now and think about it. Dear Papa, I know that you
have always done everything for the best.”
He did not see her again that evening. Her mothe.
was with her in her own room, and of course they were
talking about Cousin George for hours together. I
could not be avoided, in spite of what Emily had her.
self said of the expediency of silence. But she dic
not once allude to the possibility of a future marriage,
As the man was so dear to her, and as he bore their
name, and as he must inherit her father's title, could
not some almost superhuman exertion be made for his
salvation? Surely so much as that might be done, if
they all made it the work of their lives.
“It must be the work of my life, Mamma," she
said.
Lady Elizabeth forbore from telling her that there
was no side on which she could approach him. The
poor girl herself, however, must have felt that it was
so. As she thought of it all she reminded herself that,
though they were separated miles asunder, still she
could pray for him. We need not doubt this at least,
—that to him who utters them prayers of intercession
are of avail.
g. Some day, perhaps, be
He does not even profes
ndon, Papa, would have
he wrote like this. He
iad better just leave me
- you by mentioning his

<#PG# 297>
They must tak
the scene, try
what they had
they would let
make no rema
Early in th
now December
she was for two
She had made
owned her fai
had no gold is
other images,
On the following morning she was at breakfast, and
both her father and mother remarked that something
had been changed in her dress. The father only knew
that it was so, but the mother could have told of every
ribbon that had been dropped, and every ornament that
had been laid aside. Emily Hotspur had lived a while,
if not among the gayest of the gay, at least among the
brightest of the bright in outside garniture, and having
been asked to consult no questions of expense, had
taught herself to dress as do the gay and bright and
rich. Even when George had come on his last
wretched visit to Humblethwaite, when she had known
that he had been brought there as a blackamoor per-
haps just capable of being washed white, she had not
thought it necessary to lessen the gauds of her attire.
Though she was saddened in her joy by the knowledge
of the man's faults, she was still the rich daughter of
a very wealthy man, and engaged to marry the future
inheritor of all that wealth and riches. There was then
no reason why she should lower her flag one inch be-
fore the world. But now all was changed with her!
During the night she had thought of her apparel, and
of what use it might be during her future life. She
would never more go bright again, unless some miracle
might prevail, and he still might be to her that which
she had painted him. Neither father nor mother, as
she kissed them both, said a word as to her appearance.
remain to the
from the first
of its own wor
Prayer should
was she saw i
her. Had he
words such as
to love her it
his debts mig
"He hoped,"
his cousin mig
She remembe
And this was
and firmness.
had never de

<#PG# 298>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
RRY HOTSPUR
ning she was at breakfast, and
her remarked that something
dress. The father only kner
ther could have told of every
ped, and every ornament that
ly Hotspur had lived a while
f the gay, at least among the
Outside garniture, and having
- questions of expense, bad
do the gay and bright and
e had come on his last
waite, when she had know
there as a blackamoor per
washed white, she had not
en the gauds of her attire
a her joy by the knowledge
3 still the rich daughter of
gaged to marry the future
id riches. There was then
wer her flag one inch be-
11 was changed with her
They must take her away from Humblethwaite, chan
the scene, try to interest her in new pursuits; that w
what they had determined to attempt. For the presei
they would let her put on what clothes she pleased, ai
make no remark.
Early in the day she went out by herself. It w
now December, but the weather was fine and dry, ar
she was for two hours alone, rambling through the par
She had made her attempt in life, and had failed. Si
owned her failure to herself absolutely. The imaç
had no gold in it;—none as yet. But it was not
other images, which, as they are made, so must the
remain to the end. The Divine Spirit, which mig
from the first have breathed into this clay some partic
of its own worth, was still efficacious to bestow the gi
Prayer should not be wanting; but the thing as it no
was she saw in all its impurity. He had never love
her. Had he loved her he would not have writte
words such as those she had read. He had pretende
to love her in order that he might have money, tha
his debts might be paid, that he might not be ruinec
“He hoped,” he said in his letter, “he hoped tha
his cousin might be made happy by a splendid alliance!
She remembered well the abominable, heartless word
And this was the man who had pledged her to trut
and firmness, and whose own truth and firmness sh
had never doubted for a moment, even when acknow
vught of her apparel, and
ing her future life. She
gain, unless some miracle
ght be to her that which
:r father nor mother, as
ord as to her appearance

<#PG# 299>
296
ledging to herself the necessity of her pledge to him.
He had never loved her; and, though she did not say
hiso, did not think so, she felt that of all his sins that
sin was the one which could not be forgiven.
What should she now do with herself,-how bear
herself at this present moment of her life? She did
not tell herself now that she would die, though as she
looked forward into life all was so dreary to her, that
she would fain have known that death would give an
escape. But there were duties for her still to do.
During that winter ramble, she owned to herself for the
first time that her father had been right in his judgment
respecting their cousin, and that she, by her pertina-
city, had driven her father on till on her account he
had been forced into conduct which was distasteful to
him. She must own to her father that he had been
right; that the man, though she dearly loved him still,
was of such nature that it would be quite unfit that
she should marry him. There might still be the
miracle; her prayers were still her own to give; of them
she would say nothing to her father. She would
simply confess to him that he had been right, and then
beg of him to pardon her the trouble she had caused
him.
casion sat dow
have been right
“We have i
“No, Papa
him, and I did
he was so bad
and, Papa, Il
him as I did;-
“Nobody }
has thought of
“I blame :
feel as though
“Do not s
“You will
I wish to tell
all that I feel
“You wil
“Never!
it has killed
girl is to get
loved any or
not want to
“Papa," she said to him the following morning,
“may I come to you?” She came in, and on this oc-
deserts her,
do then, but

<#PG# 300>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
Y HOTSPUR
essity of her pledge to bim
nd, though she did not sa
felt that of all his sins that
Id not be forgiven.
do with herself, -how bear
nent of her life? She did
e would die, though as she
was so dreary to her, that
that death would give az
luties for her still to do
he owned to herself for the
been right in his judgment
that she, by her pertina
on till on her account be
t which was distasteful to
father that he had been
casion sat down at his right hand. “Of course, )
have been right, Papa,” she said.
“We have both been right, dearest, I hope.”
“No, Papa; I have been wrong! I thought I kn
him, and I did not. I thought when you told me tl
he was so bad, that you were believing false peop
and, Papa, I know now that I should not have lov
him as I did;—so quickly, like that.”
“Nobody has blamed you for a moment. Nobo
has thought of blaming you.”
"I blame myself enough; I can tell you that.
feel as though I had in a way destroyed myself.”
“Do not say that, my darling."
“You will let me speak now; will you not, Pap:
I wish to tell you everything, that you may understai
all that I feel. I shall never get over it.”
“You will, dearest; you will, indeed.”
“Never! Perhaps I shall live on; but I feel th
it has killed me for this world. I don't know how
girl is to get over it when she has said that she h
loved any one. If they are married, then she do
not want to get over it; but if they are not,-if i
deserts her, or is unworthy, or both,—what can sł
do then, but just go on thinking of it till-she dies?
he dearly loved him still,
ould be quite unfit that
lere might still be the
her own to give; of them
er father. She would
ad been right, and then
trouble she had caused
he following morning,
je in, and on this oc-

<#PG# 301>
298
.
“Very we
will, you sho
Papa, after I
"No, no,
“But, if i
do. That is
pardon for al
she knelt be
į Sir Harry used with her all the old accustomed
arguments to drive such thoughts out of her head.
He told her how good was God to His creatures, and,
specially, how good in curing by the soft hand of
time such wounds as those from which she was suffer-
ing. She should “retrick her beams," and once more
“flame in the forehead of the morning sky," if only
she would help the work of time by her own endeavours.
“Fight against the feeling, Emily, and try to conquer
it, and it will be conquered.”
“But, Papa, I do not wish to conquer it. I should
not tell you of all this, only for one thing."
“What thing, dearest?”
"I am not like other girls, who can just leave them-
selves alone and be of no trouble. You told me that
if I outlived you—"
“The property will be yours; certainly. Of course,
it was my hope, -and is,—that all that shall be settled
by your marriage before my death. The trouble and
labour is more than a woman should be called on to
support alone.”
"Just so. And it is because you are thinking of
all this, that I feel it right to tell you. Papa, I shall
never be married.”
“We will leave that for the present, Emily.”
blessed her,
There wa
at Humbleth
a long time
some terribly
Stubber befc
fected. It
tain Stubber
these debts
pay them o
that no o
existed. I
farthing of
ings. “P:
promised i
mise which
was paid,
out of his

<#PG# 302>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
RY HOTSPUR
her all the old accustomed
thoughts out of her head.
s God to His creatures, and,
uring by the soft hand of
from which she was suffer-
her beams," and orice more
the morning sky," if only
ime by her own endeavours
Emily, and try to conquer
sh to conquer it. I should
for one thing."
“Very well; only if it would make a change in
will, you should make it. You will have to be
Papa, after I am gone,-probably.”
“No, no, no.”
“But, if it were not so, I should not know wh:
do. That is all, Papa; only this,—that I beg
pardon for all the trouble I have caused you.” ]
she knelt before him, and he kissed her head,
blessed her, and wept over her.
There was nothing more heard from Cousin Ge
at Humblethwaite, and nothing more heard of hin
a long time. Mr. Boltby did pay his debts, ha
some terribly hard struggles with Mr. Hart and Car
Stubber before the liquidations were satisfactorily.
fected. It was very hard to make Mr. Hart and
tain Stubber understand that the Baronet was pa.
these debts simply because he had said that he w
pay them once before, under other circumstances,
that no other cause for their actual payment
existed. But the debts were paid, down to the
farthing of which Mr. Boltby could have credible
ing's. “Pay everything,” Sir Harry had said; “I
promised it.” Whereby he was alluding to the
mise which he had made to his daughter. Everyt
was paid, and Cousin George was able to walk in
out of his club, a free man,--and at times al:
who can just leave them
puble. You told me that
irs; certainly. Of course,
t all that shall be settled
leath. The trouble and
should be called on to
ise you are thinking of
ell you. Papa, I shall
present, Emily."

<#PG# 303>
00
appy, — with an annuity of five hundred pounds a
sar! Nothing more was said to him as to the neces-
ty of expatriation.
AMONG P
was a great
very favourite
the playbills
Very many s
on the stage.
actresses,
of her did 1
one middle-
nights of ev
she was litt
that reprob
to keep hei
she has go
first!"
“She i
George,"
“Mana
him out of
“But ?

<#PG# 304>
OT ITUMBLETHWAITE.
HOTSPUR
five hundred pounds a
to him as to the necese
CHAPTER XXIV.
The End.
AMONG playgoing folk, in the following April ti
was a great deal of talk about the marriage of
very favourite actress, Mrs. Morton. She appeare
the playbills as Mrs. George Hotspur, late Mrs. Mor
Very many spoke of her familiarly, who knew her <
on the stage,-as is the custom of men in speakinį
actresses,—and perhaps some few of these who sp
of her did know her personally. “Poor Lucy!” :
one middle-aged gentleman over fifty, who spent
nights of every week at one theatre or another. “W
she was little more than a child they married her
that reprobate Morton. Since that she has mana
to keep her head above water by hard work; and
she has gone and married another worse than
first!”
"She is older now, and will be able to mar.
George,” said another.
“Manage him! If anybody can manage to
him out of debt, or from drink either, I'll eat him.
“But he must be Sir George when old Sir H

<#PG# 305>
702
known him; <
We must not
pity her fate.
She did n
easy prey to
of reforming
less grand, 1
those which f
of Emily Ho
him, “what
lies,” said he who was defending the prudence of the
narriage.
“Yes, and won't have a penny. Will it help her
:o be able to put Lady Hotspur on the bills? Not in
he least. And the women can't forgive her and visit
her. She has not been good enough for that. A grand
old family has been disgraced, and a good actress de-
stroyed. That's my idea of this marriage.”
“I thought Georgy was going to marry his cousin-
hat awfully proud minx,” said one young fellow.
“When it came to the scratch, she would not have
nim," said another. “But there had been promises,
and so, to make it all square, Sir Harry paid his
Hebts."
“I don't believe a bit about his debts being paid,”
said the middle-aged gentleman who was fond of going
o the theatre.
Yes, George Hotspur was married: and, as far as
iny love went with him, had married the woman he
iked best. Though the actress was worlds too good
or him, there was not about her that air of cleanliness
ind almost severe purity which had so distressed him
vhile he had been forced to move in the atmosphere
of his cousin. After the copying of the letter and the
ettlement of the bills, Mrs. Morton had found no dif-
iculty in arranging matters as she pleased. She had
nown the man perhaps better than any one else had
the marriage
than that ide
tween them.
“Of cour
“And if
of course.”
“We cou
any how?"
"Not ver
you eat and
all that I ca
for your own
drop drinki
After that,
did “drop it
duce her to

<#PG# 306>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
Y HOTSIUR
ending the prudence of the
a penny. Will it help her
spur on the bills? Not in
can't forgive her and visit
enough for that. A grand
d, and a good actress de
this marriage."
ping to marry his cousin,
id one young fellow.
match, she would not have
here had been promises,
are, Sir Harry paid his
known him; and yet she thought it best to marry
We must not inquire into her motives, though we
pity her fate.
She did not intend, however, to yield herself as
easy prey to his selfishness. She had also her it
of reforming him, and ideas which, as they were m
less grand, might possibly be more serviceable t
those which for a while had filled the mind and h
of Emily Hotspur. “George,” she said, one day
him, “what do you mean to do?” This was bei
the marriage was fixed;—when nothing more was fi:
than that idea of marriage which had long existed
tween them.
“Of course we shall be spliced now," said he.
“And if so, what then? I shall keep to the sta
of course.”
“We couldn't do with the 500l. a year, I suppo
any how?”
“Not very well, I'm afraid, seeing that as a ha
you eat and drink more than that yourself. But, w
all that I can do, there must be a change. I tell y
for your own sake as well as for mine, unless you c
drop drinking, we had better give it up even ye
After that, for a month or two under her auspices,
did “drop it,”-or at least so far dropped it as to
duce her to run the risk. In April they were marrie
ut his debts being paid,"
n who was fond of going
married: and, as far as
married the woman be
ss was worlds too good
er that air of cleanliness
had so distressed him
pove in the atmosphere
g of the letter and the
ton had found no dif-
she pleased. She had
han any one else had

<#PG# 307>
304
and she must be added to the list of women who
have sacrificed themselves on behalf of men whom
they have known to be worthless. We need not pursue
his career further; but we may be sure, that though
she watched him very closely, and used a power over
him of which he was afraid, still he went gradually
from bad to worse, and was found at last to be utterly
past redemption. He was one who in early life had
never known what it was to take delight in postpon-
ing himself to another; and now there was no spark
in him of love or gratitude by which fire could be
kindled or warmth created. It had come to that with
him,—that to eat and to drink was all that was left to
him; and it was coming to that too, that the latter of
these two pleasant recreations would soon be all that
he had within his power of enjoyment. There are
such men; and of all human beings they are the most
to be pitied. They have intellects; they do think; the
hours with them are terribly long;-and they have no
hope!
The Hotspurs of Humblethwaite remained at home
till Christmas was passed, and then at once started
for Rome. Sir Harry and Lady Elizabeth both felt
that it must be infinitely better for their girl to be
away; and then there came the doctor's slow advice.
There was nothing radically amiss with Miss Hotspur,
the doctor said; but it would be better for her to be
taken elsewhere.
his home and th
might be allowe
save only that a
Rome could cu
she said. “YC
Would you wish
passed? Of cou
is, and not thin
practices in life
termined to che
spent her days
them she was at
dreary book in
the drawing-roo
visiting the poo
proved thorough
these there ma
Lady Elizabeth
and a footman
whom one preto
packed without
that wealth cou
be ever so richi
stud be ever so
enough to shak
Sir Harry Hotspur

<#PG# 308>
OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
1 HOTSPUR
to the list of women who
on behalf of men whom
chless. We need not pursze
may be sure, that though
ely, and used a power over
d, still he went gradually
5 found at last to be utterly
one who in early life bad
o take delight in postpon
d now there was no spark
e by which fire could be
It had come to that with
ink was all that was left to
that too, that the latter of
ns would soon be all that
taken elsewhere. She, knowing how her father love
his home and the people around him, begged that sh
might be allowed to stay. Nothing ailed her, she said
save only that ache at the heart which no journey
Rome could cure. “What's the use of it, Papa?
she said. “You are unhappy because I'm altered
Would you wish me not to be altered after what ha
passed? Of course I am altered. Let us take it as i
is, and not think about it.” She had adopted certai
practices in life, however, which Sir Harry was de
termined to check, at any rate for the time. She
spent her days among the poor, and when not with
them she was at church. And there was always some
dreary book in her hands when they were together in
the drawing-room after dinner. Of church-going and
visiting the poor, and of good books, Sir Harry ap-
proved thoroughly; but even of good things such as
these there may be too much. So Sir Harry and
Lady Elizabeth got a courier who spoke all languages,
and a footman who spoke German, and two maids, of
whom one pretended to speak French, and had trunks
packed without number, and started for Rome. All
that wealth could do was done; but let the horseman
be ever so rich, or the horseman's daughter, and the
stud be ever so good, it is seldom they can ride fast
enough to shake off their cares.
Sir Harry Hotspur.
of enjoyment. There are
beings they are the most
ellects; they do think; the
long;-—and they have no
thwaite remained at home
nd then at once started
Lady Elizabeth both felt
tter for their girl to be
the doctor's slow advice.
imiss with Miss Hotspur,
be better for her to be
20

<#PG# 309>
306
while at Luga
the marriage
Lady Eli
advertisement
Sir Harry, w
a manner whi
thing in it w
Sir Harry tho
and he himse.
“Already
In Rome they remained till April, and while they
were there the name of Cousin George was never
once mentioned in the hearing of Sir Harry. Be-
tween the mother and daughter no doubt there was
speech concerning him. But to Emily's mind he
was always present. He was to her as a thing
abominable, and yet necessarily tied to her by bonds
which she could never burst asunder. She felt like
some poor princess in a tale, married to an ogre from
whom there was no escape. She had given berself
up to one utterly worthless, and she knew it. But
a yet she had given herself, and could not revoke the
gift. There was, indeed, still left to her that possibility
(of a miracle, but of that she whispered nothing even
- to her mother. If there were to be a miracle, it must
be of God; and at God's throne she made her
whispers. In these days she was taken about from
sight to sight with apparent willingness. She saw
churches, pictures, statues, and ruins, and seemed to
take an interest in them. She was introduced to the
Pope, and allowed herself to be apparelled in her very
best for that august occasion. But, nevertheless, the
tenor of her way and the fashions of her life, as was
her daily dress, were grey and sad and solemn. She
lived as one who knew that the backbone of her life
was broken. Early in April they left Rome and went
north, to the Italian lakes, and settled themselves for a
lady?”
"You had
"Why not
name."
“Mrs. Mc
actress."
"Oh yes,
those days in
from George 1
had been saii
instructions of
said on that o
lowing, her fi
the mother st
next morning
she had been.

<#PG# 310>
10TSFUR
till April, and while they
Cousin George was never
aring of Sir Harry. Be
ghter no doubt there was
But to Emily's mind he
was to her as a thing
sarily tied to her by bonds
ist asunder. She felt like
e, married to an ogre from
2. She had given herself
ss, and she knew it. But
and could not revoke the
ll left to her that possibility
she whispered nothing even
ere to be a miracle, it must
l's throne she made her
she was taken about from
while at Lugano. And here the news reached them.
the marriage of George Hotspur.
Lady Elizabeth read the marriage among 1
advertisements in the Times, and at once took it
Sir Harry, withdrawing the paper from the room
a manner which made Emily sure that there was son.
thing in it which she was not intended to see. B
Sir Harry thought that the news should be told to he
and he himself told it.
“Already married!” she said. “And who is ti
lady???
“You had better not ask, my dear.”
. “Why not ask? I may, at any rate, know he
name.”
“Mrs. Morton. She was a widow, --- and a
actress.”
“Oh yes, I know,” said Emily, blushing; for i
those days in which it had been sought to wean he
from George Hotspur, a word or two about this lad
had been said to her by Lady Elizabeth under th
instructions of Sir Harry. And there was no mor
said on that occasion. On that day, and on the fol
lowing, her father observed no change in her; an
the mother spoke nothing of her fears. But on th
next morning Lady Elizabeth said that she was not a
she had been. “She is thinking of him still--always,
20*
ent willingness. She saw
and ruins, and seemed to
She was introduced to the
o be apparelled in her very
n. But, nevertheless, the
ashions of her life, as was
ind sad and solemn. She
It the backbone of her life
| they left Rome and went
ind settled themselves for a

<#PG# 311>
308
she wispered to her husband. He made no reply, but
sat alone, out in the garden, with his newspaper be-
fore him, reading nothing, but cursing that cousin of
his in his heart.
talk of goi
they should
warm weat!
"Of co
Harry. “Ma
Sir Harry.
except Hum
Our stor
scorching 34
August was
her in the
Sir Harry H
heir.
There could be no miracle now for her! Even
the thought of that was gone. The man who had
made her believe that he loved her, only in the last
autumn,-though indeed it seemed to her that years
had rolled over since, and made her old, worn-out,
and weary;--who had asked for and obtained the
one gift she had to give, the bestowal of her very
self; who had made her in her baby folly believe that
he was almost divine, whereas he was hardly human
in his lowness,--this man, whom she still loved in a
way which she could not herself understand, loving
and despising him utterly at the same time--was
now the husband of another woman. Even he, she
had felt, would have thought something of her. But
she had been nothing to him but the means of escape
from disreputable difficulties. She could not sustain
her contempt for herself as she remembered this,
and yet she showed but little of it in her outward
manner.
“I'll go when you like, Papa,” she said when the
days of May had come, “but I'd sooner stay here
a little longer if you wouldn't mind." There was no
He retu
worn-out, t
SOITOW, and
utter a word
his early so
than of his
energy left
without a f
would go to
was the tit
wife's neph
something
to him wo

<#PG# 312>
BOTSPUR
He made no reply, but
, with his newspaper be
put cursing that cousin of
acle now for ber! Even
ine. The man who had
ved her, only in the last
seemed to ber that years
made her old, word-out,
d for and obtained the
the bestowal of her very
her baby folly believe that
reas he was hardly human
whom she still loved in a
perself understand, loving
at the same time, was
I woman. Even he, she
at something of her. But
2 but the means of escape
talk of going home. It was only a question whe
they should go further north, to Lucerne, before
warm weather came.
“Of course we will remain; why not?” said
Harry. “Mamma and I like Lugano amazingly.” 1
Sir Harry. As though he could have liked any p
except Humblethwaite!
Our story is over now. They did remain till
scorching July sun had passed over their heads,
August was upon them; and then they had bu
her in the small Protestant cemetery at Lugano,
Sir Harry Hotspur was without a child and without
heir.
He returned home in the early autumn, a g
worn-out, tottering old man, with large eyes full
sorrow, and a thin mouth that was seldom opened
utter a word. In these days, I think, he recurred
his early sorrow, and thought almost more of his
than of his daughter. But he had instant, press
energy left to him for one deed. Were he to die r
without a further will, Humblethwaite and Scarrot
would go to the wretch who had destroyed him. W
was the title to him now, or even the name? :
wife's nephew was an Earl with an enormous rent-r
something so large that Humblethwaite and Scarrov
to him would be little more than additional labc
• She could not sustain
as she remembered this,
itle of it in her outward
Papa," she said when the
but I'd sooner stay here
i't mind." There was no

<#PG# 313>
10
SIR HARRY HOTSPUR OF HUMBLETHWAITE.
ut to this young man Humblethwaite and Scarrowby
rere left, and the glories of the House of Hotspur
rere at an end.
And so the story of the House of Humblethwaite
ias been told.
THE END.
PBI

<#PG# 314>
lethwaite and Scarrowby
the House of Hotspur
House of Humblethwaite
PRINTING OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHER,
0.

<#PG# 315>

<#PG# 316>

<#PG# 317>

14 DAY USE
RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED
TO
HOME USE
RETURN
LOAN PERIOD 1
202 Main Library
CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT
PENDID SEP 20'72-12 PM
R2U. CIRTD
LD 21A-50m-3294 CQ
le 1e 1975 3 4
3
H
General Library
niversiw of California

<#PG# 318>
GENERAL LIBRARY - U.C. BERKELEY
BOO0964115
==HEET
FUTURN
TU
RC
TION DEPA
202 Main Library
OAN PERIOD 1
2
HOME USE
SEMATLI TAPEPARTMENT
3
WHICH BORROWED
USE

<#PG# 319>
GET
TEBOLDADORES
DECREOSOLCHE
GIL
COCHEUSEROTECTOR
ERSTELLER
REPETR
a
CESSENCE
HOTTEET
BORCASEROGET
ES
EDDELERD
TESTETISTES
AUTORISEERITUD

