
<#PG# 0>

 
 \^- 
 
 '*^, < 
 
 ff'l^ 
 
 s#>^i 
 
 ,*>^P^5i' 
 
 ■<«» 
 
 ♦*1
<#PG# 1>

 
 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
 AT LOS ANGELES
<#PG# 2>

<#PG# 3>

<#PG# 4>

 
 . PR 
 
 THE 
 
 EPICUREAN, 
 
 A TALE. 
 
 BY 
 
 THOMAS MOORE. 
 
 ^inti) (JBBition* 
 
 LONDON: 
 
 PRINTED I'OR 
 
 LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN, 
 
 PATERNOSTER-BOW. 
 
 1831.
<#PG# 5>

 
 The Publishers beg to inform the Composers of Music, and 
 Music Sellers, that Mr. Jamks Power, of the Strand, Music 
 Seller, is the only person authorized by them to publish the So.vgs 
 or Verses in this Work connected with Music. 
 
 London : 
 
 Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode, 
 
 New-Strect- Square.
<#PG# 6>

 
 . PR 
 
 /SSI 
 
 TO 
 
 LORD JOHN RUSSELL 
 
 THIS VOLUME 
 
 IS INSCRIBED 
 
 BY 0>E WHO ADMIRES HIS CHARACTER 
 AND TALENTS, 
 
 AND IS PROUD OF HIS FRIENDSHIP. 
 
 /^.f^7.f
<#PG# 7>

<#PG# 8>

 
 LETTER TO THE TRANSLATOR, 
 
 FROM 
 
 Eso. 
 
 1 « 
 
 Cairo, June 19. 1800. 
 Mv dear Sir, 
 
 In a visit I lately paid to the monas- 
 tery of St. Macarius, — which is situated, 
 as you know, in the Valley of the Lakes 
 of Natron, — I was lucky enough to ob- 
 tain possession of a curious Greek ma- 
 nuscript, which, in the hope that you may 
 be induced to translate it, I herewith 
 send you. Observing one of the monks 
 very busily occupied in tearing up, into 
 a variety of fantastic shapes, some papers
<#PG# 9>

 
 VI 
 
 which IkuI the appearance of being the 
 leaves of old books, I inquired of him 
 the meaning of his task, and received the 
 following explanation : — 
 
 The Arabs, it seems, who are as fond 
 of pigeons as the ancient Egyptians, have 
 a superstitious notion that, if they place 
 in their pigeon-houses small scraps of 
 paper, written over with learned charac- 
 ters, *the birds are always sure to thrive 
 the better for the charm ; and the monks, 
 who are never slow in profiting by super- 
 stition, have, at all times, a supply of such 
 amulets for purchasers. 
 
 In general, the holy fathers have been 
 in the habit of scribbling tliese mystic 
 fragments, themselves; but a discovery, 
 which they have lately made, saves them 
 this trouble. Having dug up (as my in- 
 formant stated) a chest of old manuscripts, 
 which, being chiefly on the subject of al- 
 chemy, must have been buried in the time 
 of Dioclesian, " we thought we could 
 not," added the monk, " employ such
<#PG# 10>

 
 Vll 
 
 rubbish more properly, than in tearing 
 it up, as you see, for the pigeon-houses 
 of the Arabs." 
 
 On my expressing a wish to rescue 
 some part of these treasures from the fate 
 to which his indolent fraternity had con- 
 signed them, he produced the manuscript 
 which I have now the pleasure of sending 
 you, — the only one, he said, reijigaining 
 entire, — and I very readily paid hii]| the 
 price he demanded for it. 
 
 You will find the stery, I think, not 
 altogether uninteresting ; and the coin- 
 cidence, in many respects, of the curious 
 details in Chap. VI. with the description 
 of the same ceremonies in the Romance 
 gf Sefhos*, will, I have no doubt, strike 
 
 * The description, here alluded to, may also be 
 found, copied verbatim from Sethos, in the " Voy- 
 ages d'Antenor." — " In that philosophical ro- 
 mance, called' La Vie de Sethos,' " says Warburton, 
 " we find a much juster account of old Egyptian 
 wisdom, than in all the pretended ' Histoire du 
 Ciel.' " Biv. Leg. book 4. sect, 14.
<#PG# 11>

 
 VIM 
 
 you. Hoping that you may be tempted 
 to give a translation of this Tale to the 
 world, 
 
 I am, my dear Sir, 
 
 Verv truly vours, 
 
 i
<#PG# 12>

 
 
 CHAPTER I. 
 
 It was in the fourth year of the reign of 
 the late Emperor Valerian, that the fol- 
 lowers of Epicurus, who were at that time 
 numerous in Athens, proceeded to the 
 election of a person to fill the vacant chair 
 of their sect; — and, by the unanimous voice 
 of the School, I was the individual chosen 
 for their Chief. I was just then enter- 
 ing on my twenty-fourth year, and no 
 instance had ever before occurred, of a 
 person so young being selected for that 
 office. Youth, however, and the personal 
 advantages that adorn it, were not, it may 
 be supposed, among the least valid recom- 
 mendations to a sect that included within 
 its circle all the beauty as well as wit of 
 Athens, and which, though dignifying its 
 
 B
<#PG# 13>

 
 
 pursuits with the name of philosophy, was 
 little else than a pretext for the more 
 refined cultivation of pleasure. 
 
 The character of the sect had, indeed, 
 much changed, since the time of its wise 
 and virtuous founder, who, while lie as- 
 serted that Pleasure is the only Good, in- 
 culcated also that Good is the only source 
 of Pleasure. The purer part of this doc- 
 trine had long evaporated, and the tem- 
 perate Epicurus would have as little 
 recognised his own sect in the assemblage 
 of refined voluptuaries who now usurped 
 its name, as he would have known his 
 own quiet Garden in the luxurious groves 
 and bowers among which the meetings of 
 the School were now held. 
 
 Many causes, besides the attractiveness 
 of its doctrines, concurred, at this period, 
 to render our school the most popular of 
 any that still survived the glory of Greece. 
 It may generally be observed, that the pre- 
 valence, in one half of a community, of very 
 rigid notions on the subject of religion,
<#PG# 14>

 
 
 produces the opposite extreme of laxity 
 and infidelity in the other ; and this kind 
 of re-action it was that now mainly con- 
 tributed to render the doctrines of the 
 Garden the most fashionable philosophy 
 of the day. The rapid progress of the 
 Christian faith had alarmed all those, who, 
 either from piety or worldliness, were in- 
 terested in the continuance of the old 
 established creed — all who believed in 
 the Deities of Olympus, and all who 
 lived by them. The consequence was, 
 a considerable increase of zeal and ac- 
 tivity, throughout the constituted autho- 
 rities and priesthood of the whole Heathen 
 world. What was wanting in sincerity of 
 belief was made up in rigour; — the weak- 
 est parts of the Mythology were those, of 
 course, most angrily defended, and any 
 reflections, tending to bring Saturn, or his 
 wife Ops, into contempt, were punished 
 with the utmost severity of the law. 
 
 In this state of affairs, between the 
 alarmed bigotry of the declining Faith, 
 
 B 2
<#PG# 15>

 
 
 and the simple, sublime austerity of her 
 rival, it was not wonderful that those lovers 
 of ease and pleasure, who had no interest, 
 reversionary or otherwise, in the old reli- 
 gion, and were too indolent to enquire into 
 the sanctions of the new, should take refuge 
 from the severities of both under the shelter 
 of a luxurious philosophy, which, leaving 
 to others the task of disputing about the 
 future, centered all its wisdom in the full 
 enjoyment of the present. 
 
 The sectaries of the Garden had, ever 
 since the death of their founder, been 
 accustomed to dedicate to his memory 
 the twentieth day of every month. To 
 these monthly rites had, for some time, 
 been added a grand annual Festival, in 
 commemoration of his birth. The feasts, 
 given on this occasion by my predecessors 
 in the Chair, had been invariably distin- 
 guished for their taste and splendour; and 
 it was my ambition, not merely to imitate 
 this example, but even to render the anni- 
 versary, now celebrated under my auspices.
<#PG# 16>

 
 
 SO brilliant as to efface the recollection of 
 all that preceded it. 
 
 Seldom, indeed, had Athens witnessed 
 such a scene. The grounds that formed 
 the original site of the Garden had, from 
 time to time, received considerable addi- 
 tions ; and the whole extent was laid out 
 with that perfect taste, which knows how 
 to wed Nature to Art, without sacrificing 
 her simplicity to the alliance. Walks, 
 leading: through wildernesses of shade 
 and fragrance — glades, opening, as if to 
 afford a play-ground for the sunshine — 
 temples, rising on the very spots where 
 Imagination herself would have called them 
 up, and fountains and lakes, in alternate 
 motion and repose, either wantonly court- 
 ing the verdure, or calmly sleeping in its 
 embrace, — such was the variety of fea- 
 ture that diversified these fair gardens ; 
 and, animated as they were on this occa- 
 sion, by all the living wit and loveliness of 
 Athens, it afforded a scene such as my 
 own youthful fancy, rich as it was then in 
 B 3
<#PG# 17>

 
 
 images of luxury and beauty, could hardly 
 have anticipated. 
 
 The ceremonies of the day began with 
 the very dawn, when, according to the form 
 of simpler and better times, those among 
 the disciples who had apartments within 
 the Garden, bore the image of our Founder 
 in procession from chamber to chamber, 
 chanting verses in praise of — what had 
 long ceased to be objects of our imitation 
 — his frugality and temperance. 
 
 Round a beautiful lake, in the centre of 
 the Garden, stood four white Doric temples, 
 in one of which was collected a library 
 containing all the flowers of Grecian 
 literature; while, in the remaining three, 
 Conversation, the Song, and the Dance, 
 held, uninterrupted by each other, their 
 respective rites. In the Library stood 
 busts of all the most illustrious Epi- 
 cureans, both of Rome and Greece — 
 Horace, Atticus, Pliny the elder, the poet 
 Lucretius, Lucian, and the biographer of 
 the Philosophers, lately lost to us, Dio-
<#PG# 18>

 
 
 senes Laertius. There were also the por- 
 traits, in marble, of all the eminent female 
 votaries of the school — Leontium and her 
 fair daughter Danae, Themista, Philaenis, 
 and others. 
 
 It was here that, in my capacity of 
 Heresiarch, on the morning of the Festival, 
 I received the felicitations of the day from 
 some of the fairest lips of Athens ; and, in 
 pronouncing the customary oration to the 
 memory of our Master (in which it was 
 usual to dwell on the doctrines he incul- 
 cated) endeavoured to attain that art, so 
 useful before such an audience, of diffusing 
 over the gravest subjects a charm, which 
 secures them listeners even among the 
 simplest and most volatile. 
 
 Though study, as may easily be sup- 
 posed, engrossed but little of the morn- 
 ings of the Garden, yet the lighter part of 
 learning — that portion of its attic honey, 
 for which the bee is not obliged to go very 
 deep into the flower, — was zealously culti- 
 vated. Even here, however, the student 
 
 B 4
<#PG# 19>

 
 
 had to encounter distractions, which are, 
 of all others, least favourable to composure 
 of thought; and, with more than one of my 
 fair disciples, there used to occur such 
 scenes as the following, which a poet of the 
 Garden, taking his picture from the life, 
 described : — 
 
 " As o'er the lake, in evening's glow. 
 
 That temple threw its lengthening shade. 
 Upon the marble steps below 
 
 There sate a fair Corinthian maid, 
 Gracefully o'er some volume bending; 
 
 Wliile, by her side, the youthful Sage 
 Held back her ringlets, lest, descending. 
 
 They should o'er-shadow all the page." 
 
 But it was for the evening of that 
 day, that the richest of our luxuries were 
 reserved. Every part of the Garden was 
 illuminated, with the most skilful variety of 
 lustre ; while over the lake of the Temples 
 were scattered wreaths of flowers, through 
 which boats, filled with beautiful children, 
 floated, as through a liquid parterre. 
 
 Between two of these boats a perpetual 
 combat was maintained ; — their respective
<#PG# 20>

 
 
 commanders, two blooming youths, being 
 habited to represent Eros and Anteros : the 
 former, the Celestial Love of thePlatonists, 
 and the latter, that more earthly spirit, which 
 usurps the name of Love among the Epi- 
 cureans. Throughout the evening their 
 conflict was carried on with various success ; 
 the timid distance at which Eros kept from 
 his more lively antagonist being his only 
 safeguard against those darts of fire, with 
 showers of which the other continually 
 assailed him, but which, luckily falling 
 short of their mark upon the lake, only 
 scorched the flowers upon which they 
 fell, and were extinguished. 
 
 In another part of the gardens, on a 
 wide verdant glade, lighted only by the 
 moon, an imitation of the torch-race of 
 the Panathensea was performed, by young 
 boys chosen for their fleetness, and arrayed 
 with wings, like Cupids : while, not far off, a 
 group of seven nymphs, with each a star on 
 her forehead, represented the movements 
 of the planetary choir, and embodied the 
 
 B 5
<#PG# 21>

 
 
 dream of Pythagoras into real motion and 
 song. 
 
 At every turning some new enchantment 
 broke upon the ear or eye. Sometimes, 
 from the depth of a grove, from which a 
 fountain at the same time issued, there 
 came a strain of music, which, mingHng 
 with the murmur of the water, seemed hke 
 the voice of the spirit that presided over its 
 flow; — while sometimes the strain rose 
 breathing from among flowers ; and, again, 
 would appear to come suddenly from under 
 ground, as if the foot had just touched 
 some spring that set it in motion. 
 
 It seems strange that I should now dwell 
 upon these minute descriptions ; but every 
 thing connected with that memorable night 
 — even its long-repented follies — must for 
 ever live sacredly in my memory. The 
 festival concluded with a banquet, at which 
 I, of course, presided ; and, feeling myself 
 to be the ascendant spirit of the whole 
 scene, gave life to all around me, and saw 
 my own happiness reflected in that of 
 others.
<#PG# 22>

 
 
 CHAP. II. 
 
 The festival was over ; — the sounds of 
 the song and dance had ceased, and I 
 was now left in those luxurious gardens, 
 alone. Though so ardent and active a 
 votary of pleasure, I had, by nature, 
 a disposition full of melancholy ; — an 
 imagination that presented sad thoughts, 
 even in the midst of mirth and happi- 
 ness, and threw the shadow of the future 
 over the gayest illusions of the present. 
 Melancholy was, indeed, twin-born in my 
 soul with Passion ; and not even in the 
 fullest fervour of the latter, were they 
 separated. From the first moment that 
 I was conscious of thought and feeling, 
 the same dark thread had run across 
 the web ; and images of death and anni- 
 hilation mingled themselves with the most 
 smiling scenes through which my career 
 of enjoyment led me. My very passion 
 for pleasure but deepened these gloomy 
 
 B 6
<#PG# 23>

 
 
 fancies. For, shut out, as I was by my 
 creed, from a future life, and having no hope 
 beyond the narrow horizon of this, every 
 minute of delight assumed a mournful 
 preciousncss in my eyes, and pleasure, 
 like the flower of the cemetery, grew but 
 more luxuriant from the neighbourhood of 
 death. 
 
 This very night my triumph, my happi- 
 ness had seemed complete. I had been the 
 presiding genius of that voluptuous scene. 
 Both my ambition and my love of pleasure 
 had drunk deep of the cup for which they 
 thirsted. Looked up to by the learned, 
 and loved by the beautiful and the young, 
 I had seen, in every eye that met mine, 
 either the acknowledgment of triumphs 
 already won, or the promise of others, 
 still brighter, that awaited me. Yet, even 
 in the midst of all this, the same dark 
 thoughts had presented themselves; — the 
 perishableness of myself and all around 
 me every instant recurred to my mind. 
 Those hands I had prest — those eyes, in
<#PG# 24>

 
 
 which I had seen sparkling, a spirit of 
 light and life that should never die — those 
 voices, that had talked of eternal love — 
 all, all, I felt, weve but a mockery of the 
 moment, and would leave nothing eternal 
 but the silence of their dust ! 
 
 Oh, were it not for this sad voice, 
 
 Stealing amid our mirth to say, 
 That all, in which we most rejoice. 
 
 Ere night may be the earth-worm's prey ; — 
 But for this bitter — only this — 
 Full as the world is brimm'd with bliss. 
 And capable as foels my soul 
 Of draining to its depth the whole, 
 I should turn earth to heaven, and be. 
 If bliss made gods, a deity ! 
 
 Such was the description I gave of my 
 own feelings, in one of those wild, passion- 
 ate songs, to which this ferment of my 
 spirits, between mirth and melancholy, 
 gave birth. 
 
 Seldom had my heart more fully aban- 
 doned itself to such vague sadness than 
 at the present moment, when, as I paced
<#PG# 25>

 
 
 thoughtfully among the fading lights and 
 flowers of the banquet, the echo of my 
 own step was all that sounded, where so 
 many gay forms had lately been revelling. 
 The moon was still up, the morning 
 had not yet glimmered, and the calm 
 slories of night still rested on all around. 
 Unconscious whither my pathway led, I 
 wandered along, till I, at length, found 
 myself before that fair statue of Venus, 
 with which the chisel of Alcamenes had 
 embellished our Garden; — that image of 
 deified woman, the only idol to which I 
 had ever bent the knee. Leaning against 
 the pedestal, I raised my eyes to heaven, 
 and fixing them sadly and intently on the 
 ever-burning stars, as if I sought to read 
 tlie mournful secret in their light, asked, 
 wherefore was it that Man alone must 
 perish, while they, less wonderful, less 
 glorious than he, lived on in light un- 
 changeable and for ever ! — " Oh, that 
 there were some spell, some talisman," 1 
 exclamied, " to make the spirit within us
<#PG# 26>

 
 
 deathless as those stars, and open to its 
 desires a career like theirs, burning and 
 boundless throughout all time ! " 
 
 While I gave myself up to this train of 
 thought, that lassitude which earthly plea- 
 sure, however sweet, leaves behind, — as 
 if to show how earthly it is, — came 
 drowsily over me, and I sunk at the base 
 of the statue to sleep. 
 
 Even in sleep, however, my fancy was 
 still busy; and a dream, so vivid as to 
 leave behind it the impression of reality, 
 thus passed through my mind. T thought 
 myself transported to a wide desert plain, 
 where nothing seemed to breathe, or move, 
 or live. The very sky above it looked pale 
 and extinct, giving the idea, not of dark- 
 ness, but of light that had died ; — and, 
 had that region been the remains of some 
 older world, left broken up and sunless, it 
 could not have looked more dead and de- 
 solate. The only thing that bespoke life, in 
 this melancholy waste, was a small moving 
 spark, that at first glimmered in the dis-
<#PG# 27>

 
 
 tance, but, at length, slowly approached 
 the spot where I stood. As it drew 
 nearer, I could perceive that its feeble 
 gleam was from a taper in the hand of a 
 pale venerable man, who now stood, like 
 a messenger from the grave, before me. 
 After a few moments of awful silence, 
 during which he looked at me with a sad- 
 ness that thrilled my very soul, he said, 
 — " Thou, who seekest eternal life, go 
 unto the shores of the dark Nile — go 
 unto the shores of the dark Nile, and thou 
 wilt find the eternal hfe thou seekest ! " 
 
 No sooner had he said these words than 
 the death-like hue of his cheek brightened 
 into a smile of more than human promise. 
 The small torch that he held sent forth a 
 radiance, by which suddenly the whole 
 surface of the desert was illuminated, even 
 to the far distant horizon's edge, along 
 whose line were now seen gardens, palaces, 
 and spires, all bright and golden, like the 
 architecture of the clouds at sunset. Sweet 
 music, too, was heard every where, floating
<#PG# 28>

 
 
 around, and, from all sides, such varieties 
 of splendour poured, that, with the excess 
 both of harmony and of light, I woke. 
 
 That infidels should be superstitious is 
 an anomaly neither unusual nor strange. 
 A belief in superhuman agency seems 
 natural and necessary to the mind ; and, 
 if not suffered to flow in the obvious chan- 
 nels, it will find a vent in some other. 
 Hence, many who have doubted the exist- 
 ence of a God, have yet implicitly placed 
 themselves under the patronage of Fate or 
 the stars. Much the same inconsistency 
 I was consious of in my own feelings. 
 Tliough rejecting all belief in a Divine Pro- 
 vidence, I had yet a faith in dreams, that 
 all my philosophy could not conquer. Nor 
 was experience wanting to confirm me in 
 my delusion ; for, by some of those acci- 
 dental coincidences, which make the for- 
 tune of soothsayers and prophets, dreams, 
 more than once, had been to me 
 
 Oracles, truer far than oak 
 Or dove, or tripod, ever spoke.
<#PG# 29>

 
 
 It was not wonderful, therefore, that the 
 vision of that night, touching, as it did, 
 a chord so ready to vibrate, should have 
 affected me with more than ordinary power, 
 and sunk deeper into my memory with 
 every effort I made to forget it. In vain 
 did I mock at my own weakness ; — such 
 self-derision is seldom sincere. In vain 
 did I pursue my accustomed pleasures. 
 Their zest was, as usual, for ever new; but 
 still came the saddening consciousness of 
 mortality, and, with it, the recollection of 
 this visionary promise, to which my fancy, 
 in defiance of my reason, still clung. 
 
 Sometimes indulging in reveries, that 
 were little else than a continuation of my 
 dream, I even contemplated the possible 
 existence of some secret, by which youth 
 might be, if not perpetuated, at least pro- 
 longed, and that dreadful vicinity of death, 
 within whose circle love pines and pleasure 
 sickens, might be for a while averted. 
 " Who knows," I would ask, " but that in 
 Egypt, that land of wonders, where Mystery
<#PG# 30>

 
 
 hath yet unfolded but half her treasures, 
 — where so many dark secrets of the ante- 
 diluvian world still remain, undeciphered, 
 upon the pillars of Seth — who knows but 
 some charm, some amulet, may lie hid, 
 whose discovery, as this phantom hath 
 promised, but waits my coming — some 
 compound of the same pure atoms, that 
 scintillate in the stars, and whose infusion 
 into the frame of man might make him, 
 too, fadeless and immortal ! " 
 
 Thus did I fondly speculate, in those 
 rambling moods, when the life of excite- 
 ment which I led, acting upon a warm 
 heart and vivid fancy, produced an intoxi- 
 cation of spirit, during which I was not 
 wholly myself. This bewilderment, too, 
 was not a little increased by the constant 
 struggle between my own natural feelings, 
 and the cold, mortal creed of my sect, in 
 endeavouring to escape from whose dead- 
 ening bondage I but broke loose into the 
 realms of romance and fantasy. 
 
 Even, however, in my calmest and so- 
 berest moments, that strange vision per-
<#PG# 31>

 
 
 petually haunted me. In vain were all 
 my efforts to chase it from my mind ; and 
 the deliberate conclusion to which I came 
 at last, was, that without, at least, a visit to 
 Egypt, I could not rest, nor, till convinced 
 of my folly by disappointment, be reason- 
 able. Without delay, therefore, I an- 
 nounced to my associates of the Garden, 
 the intention which I had formed to pay a 
 visit to the land of Pyramids. To none of 
 them did I dare to confess the vague, vi- 
 sionary impulse that actuated me. Know- 
 ledge was the object that I alleged, while 
 Pleasure was that for which they gave me 
 credit. The interests of the School, it was 
 apprehended, would suffer by my absence ; 
 and there were some tenderer ties, which 
 had still more to fear from separation. But 
 for the former inconvenience a temporary 
 remedy was provided ; while the latter a 
 skilful distribution of vows and sighs alle- 
 viated. Being furnished with recommend- 
 atory letters to all parts of Egypt, in the 
 summer of the year 257, A.D. I set sail for 
 Alexandria.
<#PG# 32>

 
 
 CHAP. III. 
 
 To one, who extracted such sweets from 
 every moment on land, a sea-voyage, how- 
 ever smooth and favourable, appeared the 
 least agreeable mode of losing time that 
 could be devised. Often did my imagin- 
 ation, in passing some isle of those seas, 
 people it with fair forms and kind hearts, 
 to whom most willingly, if I might, would I 
 have paused to pay homage. But the wind 
 blew direct towards the land of Mystery ; 
 and, still more, I heard a voice within me, 
 whispering for ever " On." 
 
 As we approached the coast of Egypt, 
 our course became less prosperous; and 
 we had a specimen of the benevolence of 
 the divinities of the Nile, in the shape of a 
 storm, or rather whirlwind, which had 
 nearly sunk our vessel, and which, the 
 Egyptians on board said, was the work of 
 their god, Typhon. After a day and night
<#PG# 33>

 
 
 of danger, during wliicli we were driven 
 out of our course to the eastward, some 
 benigner influence prevailed above; and, 
 at length, as the morning freshly broke, 
 we saw the beautiful city of Alexandria 
 rising from the sea, with its Palace of 
 Kings, its portico of four hundred columns, 
 and the fair Pillar of Pillars, towering up 
 to heaven in the midst. 
 
 After passing in review this splendid 
 vision, we shot rapidly round the Rock of 
 Pharos, and, in a few minutes, found our- 
 selves in the harbour of Eunostus. The 
 sun had risen, but the light on the Great 
 Tower of the Rock was still burning : and 
 there was a languor in the first waking 
 movements of that voluptuous city — whose 
 houses and temples lay shining in silence 
 round the harbour — that sufficiently at- 
 tested the festivities of the preceding night. 
 
 We were soon landed on the quay ; and, 
 as I walked, through a line of palaces and 
 shrines, up the street which leads from the 
 sea to the Gate of Canopus, fresh as I was
<#PG# 34>

 
 
 from the contemplation of my own lovely 
 Athens, I yet felt a glow of admiration at 
 the scene around me, which its novelty, 
 even more than its magnificence, inspired. 
 Nor were the luxuries and delights, which 
 such a city promised, among the least of 
 the considerations on which my fancy 
 dwelt. On the contrary, every thing 
 around seemed prophetic of future plea- 
 sure. Tlie very forms of the architec- 
 ture, to my Epicurean imagination, ap- 
 peared to call up images of living grace ; 
 and even the dim seclusion of the temples 
 and groves spoke only of tender mysteries 
 to my mind. As the whole bright scene 
 grew animated around me, I felt that 
 though Egypt might not enable me to 
 lengthen life, she could teach the next best 
 art, — that of multiplying its enjoyments. 
 
 The population of Alexandria, at this 
 period, consisted of the most motley mis- 
 cellany of nations, religions, and sects, that 
 had ever been brought together in one 
 city. Beside the school of the Grecian
<#PG# 35>

 
 
 Platonist was seen tlie oratory of the 
 cabalistic Jew ; while the church of the 
 Christian stood, inidisturbed, over the 
 crypts of the Egyptian Hierophant. Here, 
 the adorer of Fire, from the East, laughed 
 at the superstition of the worshipper of 
 cats, from the West. Here Christianity, 
 too, unluckily, had learned to emulate 
 the vagaries of Paganism; and while, 
 on one side, her Ophite professor was 
 seen kneeling down gravely before his 
 serpent, on the other, a Nicosian was, as 
 gravely, contending that there was no 
 chance of salvation out of the pale of the 
 Greek alphabet. Still worse, the unchari- 
 tableness of Christian schism was already 
 distinguishing itself with equal vigour ; and 
 I heard of nothing, on my arrival, but the 
 rancour and hate, with which the Greek 
 and Latin churchmen persecuted each 
 other, because, forsooth, the one fasted 
 on the seventh day of the week, and the 
 others fasted upon the fourth and sixth !
<#PG# 36>

 
 
 To none of those religions or sects, how- 
 ever, except for purposes of ridicule, did 
 I pay much attention. I was now in the 
 most luxurious city of the universe, and 
 gave way, without reserve, to the seduc- 
 tions that surrounded me. My reputation, 
 as a philosopher and a man of pleasure, 
 had preceded me; and Alexandria, the 
 second Athens of the world, welcomed me 
 as her ovm. My celebrity, indeed, was as 
 a talisman, that opened hearts and doors 
 at my approach. The usual noviciate of 
 acquaintance was dispensed with in my 
 favour, and not only intimacies, but loves 
 and friendships, ripened in my path, as 
 rapidly as vegetation springs up where the 
 Nile has flowed. The dark beauty of the 
 Egyptian women had a novelty in my eyes 
 that enhanced its other charms ; and that 
 hue left by the sun on their rounded cheeks 
 was but an earnest of the ardour he had 
 kindled in their hearts — 
 
 Th' imbrowning of the fruit, that tells 
 
 How rich within the soul of sweetness dwells.
<#PG# 37>

 
 
 Some weeks rolled on in such perpetual 
 and ever-changing pleasures, that even the 
 melancholy voice in my heart, though it 
 still spoke, was but seldom listened to, and 
 soon died away in the sound of the siren 
 songs that surrounded me. At length, 
 however, as the novelty of these scenes 
 wore off, the same gloomy bodings began 
 to mingle with all my joys ; and an incident 
 that occurred, during one of my gayest 
 revels, conduced still more to deepen their 
 
 gloom. 
 
 The celebration of the annual festival 
 of Serapis took place during my stay, and 
 I was, more than once, induced to mingle 
 with the gay multitudes, that crowded to 
 his shrine at Canopus on the occasion. 
 Day and night, while this festival lasted, 
 the canal, which led from Alexandria to 
 Canopus, was covered with boats full of 
 pilgrims of both sexes, all hasteningto avail 
 themselves of this pious licence, which lent 
 the zest of a religious sanction to pleasure, 
 and gave a holiday to the passions of earth, 
 in honour of heaven.
<#PG# 38>

 
 
 I was returning, one lovely niglit, to 
 Alexandriia. The north wind, that wel- 
 come visitor, freshened the air, while the 
 banks, on either side, sent forth, from 
 groves of orange and henna, the most 
 delicious odours. As I had left all the 
 crowd behind me at Canopus, there was 
 not a boat to be seen on the canal but 
 my own; and I was just yielding -^o the 
 thoughts which solitude at such an hour 
 inspires, when my reveries were broken 
 by the sound of some female voices, coming, 
 mingled with laughter and screams, from 
 the garden of a pavilion, that stood, bril- 
 liantly illuminated, upon the bank of the 
 canal. 
 
 On rowing nearer, I perceived that 
 both the mirth and the alarm had been 
 caused by the efforts of some playful girls to 
 reach a hedge ofjasmin which grew near the 
 water, and in bending towards which they 
 had nearly fallen into the stream. Hasten- 
 ing to proffer my assistance, I soon recog- 
 nised the voice of one of my fair Alexandrian 
 
 c 2
<#PG# 39>

 
 
 friends, and, springing on the bank, was 
 surrounded by the whole group, who in- 
 sisted on my joining their party in the 
 paviUon, and having flung the tendrils of 
 jasmin, which they had just plucked, 
 around me, led me, no unwilling captive, 
 to the banquet-room. 
 
 I found here an assemblage of the very 
 flower of Alexandrian society. The unex- 
 pectedness of the meeting gave it an addi- 
 tional zest on both sides ; and seldom had 
 I felt more enlivened myself, or contri- 
 buted more successfully to circulate life 
 among others. 
 
 Among the company were some Greek 
 women, who, according to the fashion of 
 their country, wore veils; but, as usual, 
 rather to set off than conceal their beauty, 
 some gleams of which were continually 
 escaping from under the cloud. There 
 was, however, one female, who particularly 
 attracted my attention, on whose head was 
 a chaplet of dark-coloured flowers, and 
 who sat veiled and silent during the whole
<#PG# 40>

 
 
 of the banquet. She took no share, I ob- 
 served, in what was passing around ; the 
 viands and the wine went by her untouched, 
 nor did a word that was spoken seem ad- 
 dressed to her ear. This abstraction from 
 a scene so sparkling with gaiety, though 
 apparently unnoticed by any one but my- 
 self, struck me as mysterious and strange. 
 I inquired of my fair neighbour the cause 
 of it, but she looked grave and was silent. 
 
 In the mean time, the lyre and the cup 
 went round; andayoung maid from Athens, 
 as if inspired by the presence of her coun- 
 tryman, took her lute, and sung to it some 
 of the songs of Greece, with a feeling that 
 bore me back to the banks of the Ilissus, 
 and, even in the bosom of present plea- 
 sure, drew a sigh from my heart for that 
 which had passed away. It was daybreak 
 ere our delighted party rose, and unwill- 
 mgly re-embarked to return to the city. 
 
 Scarcely were we afloat, when it was 
 discovered that the lute of the young 
 Athenian had been left behind ; and, witli 
 
 c 3
<#PG# 41>

 
 
 my heart still full of its sweet sounds, I 
 most readily sprung on shore to seek it. I 
 hastened to the banquet-room, which was 
 now dim and solitary, except that— there, to 
 my astonishment, still sat that silent figure, 
 which had awakened my curiosity so 
 strongly during the night. A vague feel- 
 ing of awe came over me, as I now slowly 
 approached it. There was no motion, 
 no sound of breathing in that form ; — 
 not a leaf of the dark chaplet on its brow 
 stirred. By the light of a dying lamp 
 which stood before the figure, I raised, 
 with a hesitating hand, the veil, and saw — 
 what my fancy had already anticipated — 
 that the shape underneath was lifeless, was 
 a skeleton ! Startled and shocked, I hur- 
 ried back with the lute to the boat, and 
 was almost as silent as that shape itself 
 for the remainder of the voyage. 
 
 This custom among the Egyptians of 
 placing a mummy, or skeleton, at the 
 banquet-table, had been for some time 
 disused, except at particular ceremonies ;
<#PG# 42>

 
 
 and, even on such occasions, it had been 
 the practice of the luxurious Alexandrians 
 to disguise this memorial of mortality in the 
 manner just described. But to me, who 
 was wholly unprepared for such a spec- 
 tacle, it gave a shock from which my 
 imagination did not speedily recover. This 
 silent and ghastly witness of mirth seemed 
 to embody, as it were, the shadow in my 
 own heart. The features of the grave 
 were now stamped on the idea that haunted 
 me, and this picture of what I was to be 
 mingled itself with the sunniest aspect of 
 what I was. 
 
 The memory of the dream now recurred 
 to me more livelily than ever. The bright, 
 assuring smile of that venerable Spirit, 
 and his words, " Go to the shores of the 
 dark Nile, and thou wilt find the eternal 
 life thou seekest," were for ever before my 
 mind. But as yet, alas, I had done nothing 
 towards realising this splendid promise. 
 Alexandria was not Egypt ; — the very 
 soil on which it stood was not in exist- 
 
 c 4
<#PG# 43>

 
 
 ence, when Tliebes and Memphis already 
 counted ages of glory. 
 
 " It is beneath the Pyramids of Mem- 
 phis," I exclaimed, "or in the mystic Halls 
 of the Labyrinth, that I must seek those 
 holy arcana of science, of which the ante- 
 diluvian world has made Egypt its heir, and 
 among which — blest thought ! — the key 
 to eternal life may lie." 
 
 Having formed my determination, I took 
 leave of my many Alexandrian friends, 
 and departed for Memphis.
<#PG# 44>

 
 
 CHAP. IV. 
 
 Egypt was the country, of all others, 
 from that mixture of the melancholy and 
 the voluptuous, which marked the cha- 
 racter of her people, her religion, and her 
 scenery, to affect deeply a temperament 
 and fancy like mine, and keep tremblingly 
 alive the sensibilities of both. Wherever 
 I turned, 1 saw the desert and the garden, 
 mingling their bloom and desolation to- 
 gether. I saw the love-bower and the 
 tomb standing side by side, and pleasure 
 and death keeping hourly watch upon each 
 other. In the very luxury of the climate 
 there was the same saddeninj; influence. 
 Tlie monotonous splendour of the days, 
 the solemn radiance of the nights — all 
 tended to cherish that ardent melancholy, 
 the oifspring of passion and of thought, 
 which had so long been the familiar inmate 
 of my soul. 
 
 c 5
<#PG# 45>

 
 
 When I sailed from Alexandria, the in-, 
 undation of the Nile was at its full. The 
 whole valley of Egypt lay covered by its 
 flood ; and, as I saw around me, in the 
 light of the setting sun, shrines, palaces, 
 and monuments, encircled by the waters, I 
 could almost fancy that I beheld the sink- 
 infT island of Atalantis, on the last evening 
 its temples were visible above the wave. 
 Such varieties, too, of animation as pre- 
 sented themselves on every side ! — 
 
 While, far as sight can reach, beneath as clear 
 And blue a heaven as ever bless'd this sphere, 
 Gardens, and pillar'd streets, and porphyry domes, 
 And high-built temples, fit to be the homes 
 Of mighty gods, — and pyramids, whose hour 
 Outlasts all time, above the waters tower ! 
 
 Then, too, the scenes of pomp and joy, that make 
 One theatre of this vast peopled lake, 
 Where all that Love, Religion, Commerce gives 
 Of life and motion, ever moves and lives. 
 Here, up the steps of temples, from the wave 
 Ascending, in procession slow and grave. 
 Priests, in white garments, go, with sacred wands 
 And silver cymbals gleaming in their hands :
<#PG# 46>

 
 
 While, there, rich barks — fresh from those sunny 
 
 tracts 
 Far off, beyond the sounding cataracts — 
 Glide with then- precious lading to the sea, 
 Plumes of bright birds, rhinoceros' ivory. 
 Gems from the isle of Meroe, and those grains 
 Of gold, wash'd down by Abyssinian rains. 
 
 Here, where the waters wind into a bay 
 Shadowy and cool, some pilgrims, on their way 
 To Sais or Bubastus, among beds 
 Of lotus-flowers, that close above their heads, 
 Push thei"" light barks, and hid, as in a bower. 
 Sing, talk, or sleep away the sultry hour ; 
 While halply, not far off, beneath a bank 
 Of blossoming acacias, many a prank 
 Is play'd in the cool current by a train 
 Of laughing nymphs, lovely as she, whose chain 
 Around two conquerors of the world was cast, 
 But, for a third too feeble, broke at last ! 
 
 Enchanted with the whole scene, I lin- 
 gered on my voyage, visiting all those lux- 
 urious and venerable places, whose names 
 have been consecrated by the wonder of 
 ages- At Sais I was present during her 
 Festival of Lamps, and read, by the blaze 
 of innumerable lights, those sublime words 
 
 c 6
<#PG# 47>

 
 
 on the temple of Neitha : " I am all that 
 has been, that is, and that will be, and no 
 man hath ever lifted my veil." I wandered 
 among the prostrate obelisks of Heliopolis, 
 and saw, not without a sigh, the sun smiling 
 over her ruins, as if in mockery of the mass 
 of perishable grandeur, that had once called 
 itself, in its pride, " The City of the Sun." 
 But to the Isle of the Golden Venus was 
 my fondest pilgrimage ; — and as I ram- 
 bled through its shades, where bowers are 
 the only temples, I felt how far more fit to 
 form the shrine of a Deity are the ever- 
 living stems of the garden and the grove, 
 than the most precious columns that the 
 inanimate quarry can supply. 
 
 Every where new pleasures, new inter- 
 ests awaited me ; and though Melancholy, 
 as usual, stood always near, her shadow 
 fell but half-way over my vagrant path, 
 and left the rest more welcomely brilliant 
 from the contrast. To relate my various 
 adventures, during this short voyage, would 
 only detain me from events, far, far more
<#PG# 48>

 
 
 worthy of record. Amidst such endless 
 variety of attractions, the great object of 
 my journey was forgotten ; — the mysteries 
 of this land of the sun were, to me, as much 
 mysteries as ever, and I had as yet been 
 initiated in nothing but its pleasures. 
 
 It was not till that evening, when I first 
 stood before the Pyramids of Memphis, 
 and saw them towering aloft, like the 
 watch-towers of Time, from whose sum- 
 mit, when he expires, he will look his last, 
 — it was not till this moment that the 
 great secret, of which I had dreamed, 
 again rose, in all its inscrutable darkness, 
 upon my thoughts. There was a solem- 
 nity in the sunshine that rested upon those 
 monuments — a stillness, as of reverence, 
 in the air around them, that stole, like the 
 music of past times, into my heart. I 
 thought what myriads of the wise, the 
 beautiful, and the brave, had sunk into 
 dust since earth first beheld those wonders ; 
 and, in the sadness of my soul, I exclaimed, 
 — " Must man alone, then, perish ? must 
 
 4S'iv'8
<#PG# 49>

 
 
 minds and hearts be annihilated, while 
 pyramids endure ? Death, Death, even on 
 these everlasting tablets, — the only ap- 
 proach to innnortality that kings them- 
 selves could purchase, — thou hast written 
 our doom, saying, awfully and intelligibly, 
 * There is, for man, no eternal mansion, 
 but the tomb ! ' " 
 
 My heart sunk at the thought; and, 
 for the moment, I yielded to that desolate 
 feeling, which overspreads the soul that 
 hath no light from the future. But again 
 the buoyancy of my nature prevailed, and 
 again, the willing dupe of vain dreams, 
 I deluded myself into the belief of all thdt 
 I most wished, with that happy facility 
 which makes imagination stand in place 
 of happiness. " Yes," I cried, " immor- 
 tality must be within man's reach ; and, as 
 wisdom alone is worthy of such a blessing, 
 to the wise alone must the secret have 
 been revealed. Deep, it is said, under 
 yonder pyramid, has for ages lain con- 
 cealed the Table of Emerald, on which
<#PG# 50>

 
 
 the Thrice- Great Hermes engraved, be- 
 fore the flood, the secret of Alchemy, that 
 gives gold at will. Why may not the 
 mightier, the more god-like secret, that 
 gives life at will, be recorded there also ? 
 It was by the power of gold, of endless 
 gold, that the kings, who repose in those 
 massy structures, scooped earth to the 
 centre, and raised quarries into the air, to 
 provide themselves with tombs that might 
 outstand the world. Who can tell but that 
 the gift of immortality was also theirs? 
 who knows but that they themselves, 
 triumphant over decay, still live — those 
 mighty mansions, which we call tombs, 
 being rich and everlasting palaces, within 
 whose depths, concealed from this wither- 
 innr world, they still wander, with the few 
 who are sharers of their gift, through a 
 sunless, but illuminated, elysium of their 
 own ? Else, wherefore those structures ? 
 wherefore that subterranean realm, by 
 which the whole valley of Egypt is under- 
 mined? Why, else, those labyrinths, which
<#PG# 51>

 
 
 none of earth hath ever beheld — which 
 none of heaven, except that God, with the 
 finger on his hushed lip, hath trodden!" 
 
 While I indulged in these dreams, the 
 sun, half sunk beneath the horizon, was 
 taking, calmly and gloriously, his leave of 
 the Pyramids, — as he had done, evening 
 after evening, for ages, till they had become 
 familiar to him as the earth itself. On the 
 side turned to his ray they now presented 
 a front of dazzling whiteness, while, on 
 the other, their great shadows, lengthen- 
 ing to the eastward, looked like the first 
 steps of Night, hastening to envelope the 
 hills of Araby in her shade. 
 
 No sooner had the last gleam of the sun 
 disappeared, than, on every house-top in 
 Memphis, gay, gilded banners were seen 
 waving aloft, to proclaim his setting, — 
 while a full burst of harmony pealed from 
 all the temples along the shores. 
 
 Startled from my musing by these 
 sounds, I at once recollected, that, on that 
 very evening, the great festival of the Moon
<#PG# 52>

 
 
 was to be celebrated. On a little island, 
 half-way over between the gardens o 
 Memphis and the eastern shore, stood the 
 temple of that goddess, 
 
 Whose beams 
 Bring the sweet time of night-flowers and dreams. 
 Kot the cold Dian of the North, who chains 
 In vestal ice the current of young veins ; 
 But she, who haunts the gaj-, Bubastian grove. 
 And owns she sees, from her bright heav'n above. 
 Nothing on earth, to match that heav'n, but love ! 
 
 Thus did I exclaim, in the words of one 
 of their own Egyptian poets, as, antici- 
 patmg the various delights of the festival, 
 I cast away from my mind all gloomy 
 thoughts, and, hastening to my little bark, 
 in which I now lived, like a Nile-bird, on 
 the waters, steered my course to the island- 
 temple of the Moon.
<#PG# 53>

 
 
 CHAP. V. 
 
 The rising of the Moon, slow and majestic? 
 as if conscious of the honours that awaited 
 her upon earth, was welcomed with a loud 
 acclaim from every eminence, where mul- 
 titudes stood watching for her first light. 
 And seldom had she risen upon a scene 
 more beautiful. Memphis, — still grand, 
 though no longer the unrivalled Memphis, 
 that had borne away from Thebes the 
 crown of supremacy, and worn it undis- 
 puted through so many centuries, — now, 
 softened by the moonlight that harmonised 
 with her dechne, shone forth amone; her 
 lakes, her pyramids, and her shrines, like 
 a dream of glory that was soon to pass 
 away. Ruin, even now, was but too visible 
 around her. The sands of the Libyan desert 
 gained upon her like a sea ; and, among 
 solitary columns and sphinxes, already half 
 sunk ^rom sight. Time seemed to stand
<#PG# 54>

 
 
 waiting, till all, that now flourished around, 
 should fall beneath his desolating hand, 
 like the rest. 
 
 On the waters all was life and gaiety. 
 As far as eye could reach, the lights of in- 
 numerable boats were seen, studding, like 
 rubies, the surface of the stream. Vessels 
 of all kinds, — from the light coracle, built 
 for shooting down the cataracts, to the 
 large yacht that glides to the sound of 
 flutes, — all were afloat for this sacred 
 festival, filled with crowds of the young 
 and the gay, not only from Memphis 
 and Babylon, but from cities still farther 
 removed from the scene. 
 
 As I approached the island, I could see, 
 glittering through the trees on the bank, 
 the lamps of the pilgrims hastening to 
 the ceremony. Landing in the direction 
 which those lights pointed out, I soon 
 joined the crowd ; and, passing through a 
 long alley of sphinxes, whose spangling 
 marble shone out from the dark sycamores 
 around them, in a short time reached
<#PG# 55>

 
 
 the grand vestibule of the temple, where 
 I found the ceremonies of the evening 
 already commenced. 
 
 In this vast hall, which was surrounded 
 by a double range of columns, and lay 
 open over-head to the stars of heaven, I 
 saw a group of young maidens, moving in 
 a sort of measured step, between walk and 
 dance, round a small shrine, upon which 
 stood one of those sacred birds, that, on 
 account of the variegated colour of their 
 wings, are dedicated to the moon. The 
 vestibule was dimly lighted, — there being 
 but one lamp of naphtha on each of the 
 great pillars that encircled it. But, having 
 taken my station beside one of those pil- 
 lars, I had a distinct view of the young 
 dancers, as in succession they passed me. 
 
 Their long, graceful drapery was as white 
 as snow ; and each wore loosely, beneath 
 the rounded bosom, a dark-blue zone, or 
 bandelet, studded, like the skies at mid- 
 night, with little silver stars. Through 
 their dark locks was wreathed the white
<#PG# 56>

 
 
 lily of the Nile, — that flower being ac- 
 counted no less welcome to the moon, than 
 the solden blossoms of the bean-flower are 
 known to be to the sun. As they passed 
 under the lamp, a gleam of light flashed 
 from their bosoms, which, I could perceive, 
 was the reflection of a small mirror, that, 
 in the manner of the women of the East, 
 each dancer wore beneath her left; shoulder. 
 
 There was no music to regulate their 
 steps ; but, as they gracefully went round 
 the bird on the shrine, some, by the beat 
 of the Castanet, some, by the shrill ring 
 of a sistrum, — which they held up- 
 lifl;ed in the attitude of their own divine 
 Isis, — harmoniously timed the cadence of 
 their feet ; while others, at every step, 
 shook a small chain of silver, whose sound, 
 minsling with those of the castanets and 
 sistrums, produced a wild, but not an un- 
 pleasing harmony. 
 
 They seemed all lovely ; but there was 
 one — whose face the light had not yet 
 reached, so downcast she held it, — who
<#PG# 57>

 
 
 attracted, and, at length, riveted all my 
 attention. I knew not why, but there was 
 a something in those half-seen features, — • 
 a charm in the very shadow, that hung 
 over their imagined beauty, — which took 
 me more than all the out-shining love- 
 liness of her companions. So enchained 
 was my fancy by this coy mystery, that 
 her alone, of all the group, could I either 
 see or think of — her alone I watched, as, 
 with the same downcast brow, she glided 
 round the altar, gently and aerially, as if 
 her presence, like that of a spirit, was 
 something to be felt, not seen. 
 
 Suddenly, while I gazed, the loud crash 
 of a thousand cymbals was heard; — the 
 massy gates of the Temple flew open, as 
 if by magic, and a flood of radiance from 
 the illuminated aisle filled the whole vesti- 
 bule; while, at the same instant, as if the 
 lio-ht and the sounds were born together, 
 a peal of rich harmony came mingling 
 with the radiance. 
 
 It was then, — by that light, which shone
<#PG# 58>

 
 
 full upon the young maiden's features, as, 
 starting at the blaze, she raised her eyes to 
 the portal, and, as suddenly, let fall their 
 lids again, — it Was then I beheld, what 
 even my own ardent imagination, in its 
 most vivid dreams of beauty, had never pic- 
 tured. Not Psyche herself, when pausing 
 on the threshold of heaven, while its 
 fii'st fflories fell on her dazzled lids, could 
 have looked more beautiful, or blushed 
 with a more innocent shame. Often as I 
 had felt the power of looks, none had ever 
 entered into my soul so deeply. It was a 
 new feeling — a new sense — coming as 
 suddenly as that radiance into the vestibule, 
 and, at once, filling my whole being; — and 
 had that vision but lingered another mo- 
 ment before my eyes, I should have wholly 
 forffotten who I was and where, and thrown 
 myself, in prostrate adoration, at her feet. 
 
 But scarcely had that gush of harmony 
 been heard, when the sacred bird, which 
 liad, till now, stood motionless as an image, 
 expanded his wings, and flew into the Tem-
<#PG# 59>

 
 
 pie; while his graceful young worshippers, 
 with a fleetness like his own, followed, — 
 and she, who had left a dream in my 
 heart never to be forgotten, vanished with 
 the rest. As she went rapidly past the 
 pillar against which I leaned, the ivy 
 that encircled it caught in her drapery, 
 and disenffaored some ornament which fell 
 to the ground. It was the small mirror 
 which I had seen shining on her bosom. 
 Hastily and tremulously I picked it up, 
 and hurried to restore it; — but she was 
 already lost to my eyes in the crowd. 
 
 In vain did I try to follow; — the aisles 
 were already filled, and numbers of eager 
 pilgrims pressed towards the portal. But 
 the servants of the Temple prevented all 
 further entrance, and still, as I presented 
 myself, their white wands barred the 
 way. Perplexed and irritated amid that 
 crowd of faces, regarding all as enemies 
 that impeded my progress, I stood on 
 tiptoe, gazing into the busy aisles, and 
 with a heart beating as I caught, from
<#PG# 60>

 
 
 time to time, a glimpse of some spangled 
 zone, or lotus wreath, which led me to 
 fancy that I had discovered the object of 
 my search. But it was all in vain ; — 
 in every direction, files of sacred nymphs 
 were moving, but nowhere could I see her 
 whom alone I sought. 
 
 In this state of breathless agitation did 
 I stand for some time, — bewildered with 
 the confusion of faces and lights, as well 
 as with the clouds of incense that rolled 
 around me, — till, fevered and impatient, I 
 could endure it no longer. Forcing my 
 way out of the vestibule into the cool air, 
 I hurried back through the alley of 
 sphinxes to the shore, and flung myself 
 into my boat. 
 
 There is, to the north of Memphis, a 
 solitary lake (which, at this season of the 
 year, mingles with the rest of the waters)*, 
 upon whose shores stands the Necropolis, 
 or City of the Dead — a place of melancholy 
 grandeur, covered over with shrines and py- 
 ramids, where many a kingly head, proud 
 
 D
<#PG# 61>

 
 
 even in death, has for ages been awaiting 
 the resurrection of its glories. Through 
 a range of sepulchral grots underneath, 
 the humbler denizens of the tomb are de- 
 posited, — looking out on each successive 
 generation that visits them, with the same 
 face and features they w^ore centuries ago. 
 Every plant and tree, that is consecrated to 
 death, from the asphodel-flower to the 
 mystic plantain, lends its sweetness or 
 shadow to this place of tombs ; and the 
 only noise that disturbs its eternal calm, 
 is the low humming sound of the priests 
 at prayer, when a new inhabitant is added 
 to the silent city. 
 
 It was towards this place of death that, 
 in a mood of mind, as usual, half bright, 
 half gloomy, I now, almost unconsciously, 
 directed my bark. The form of the young- 
 Priestess was continually before me. That 
 one bright look of hers, the very memory 
 of which was worth all the actual smiles of 
 others, never left my mind. Absorbed in 
 such thoughts, I rowed on, scarce knowing
<#PG# 62>

 
 
 whither I went, till, startled by finding 
 myself within the shadow of the City of 
 the Dead, I looked up, and saw, rising in 
 succession before me, pyramid beyond 
 pyramid, each towering more loftily than 
 the other, — while all were out-topped in 
 grandeur by one, vipon whose summit the 
 moon seemed to rest as on a pedestal. 
 
 Drawing near to the shore, which was 
 sufficiently elevated to raise this city of 
 monuments above the level of the inunda- 
 tion, I rested my oar, and let the boat rock 
 idly on the water, while my thoughts, left 
 equally without direction, fluctuated as 
 idly. How various and vague were the 
 dreams that then passed through my mind 
 — that bright vision of the temple min- 
 gling itself with all ! Sometimes she stood 
 before me, like an aerial spirit, as pure as if 
 that element of music and light, into which 
 I had then seen her vanish, was her only 
 dwelling. Sometimes, animated with pas- 
 sion, and kindling into a creature of earth, 
 she seemed to lean towards me with looks 
 D 2
<#PG# 63>

 
 
 of tenderness, which it were worth worlds, 
 but for one instant, to inspire ; and again 
 — as the dark fancies, that ever haunted 
 me, recurred — 1 saw her cold, parched, 
 and blackening, amid the gloom of those 
 eternal sepulchres before me ! 
 
 Turning away, with a shudder, from 
 the cemetery at this thought, I heard the 
 sound of an oar plying swiftly through 
 the water, and, in a few moments, saw, 
 shooting past me towards the shore, a 
 small boat in which sat two female figures, 
 muffled up and veiled. Having landed 
 them not far from the spot where, con- 
 cealed by the shadow of a monument 
 on the bank, I lay, the boat again de- 
 parted, with the same fleetness, over the 
 flood. 
 
 Never had the prospect of an adventure 
 come more welcome than at this moment, 
 when my fancy was weaving such chains 
 for my heart, as threatened a bondage, of 
 all others, the most, difficult to break. To 
 become enamoured thus of a creature of
<#PG# 64>

 
 
 my own imagination, was the worst, be- 
 cause the most lasting, of follies. Reality 
 alone gives a chance of dissolving such 
 spells, and the idol I was now creating to 
 myself must for ever remain ideal. Any 
 pursuit, therefore, that seemed likely to 
 divert me from such thoughts — to bring 
 back my imagination to earth and reality, 
 from the vague region in which it had 
 been wandering, was a relief too season- 
 able not to be welcomed with eagerness. 
 
 I had watched the course which the two 
 figures took, and, having hastily fastened 
 my boat to the bank, stepped gently on 
 shore, and, at a little distance, followed 
 them. The windings through which they 
 led were intricate ; but, by the bright light 
 of the moon, I was enabled to keep their 
 forms in view, as, with rapid step, they 
 glided among the monuments. At length, 
 in the shade of a small pyramid, whose 
 peak barely surmounted the plane-trees 
 that grew nigh, they vanished from my 
 sight. I hastened to the spot, but there was 
 
 D 3
<#PG# 65>

 
 
 not a sign of life around ; and, had my creed 
 extended to another world, I might have 
 fancied that these mysterious forms were 
 spirits, sent from thence to mock me, — 
 so instantaneously they disappeared. I 
 searched through the neighbouring grove, 
 but all there was still as death. At length, 
 in examining one of the sides of the pyra- 
 mid, which, for a few feet from the ground, 
 was furnished with steps, I found, midway 
 between peak and base, a part of the sur- 
 face, which, though presenting an appear- 
 ance of smoothness to the eye, gave to the 
 touch, I thought, indications of a concealed 
 opening. 
 
 After a variety of efforts and experi- 
 ments, I, at last, more by accident than 
 skill, pressed the spring that commanded 
 this hidden aperture. In an instant the 
 portal slid aside, and disclosed a narrow 
 stair-way within, the two or three first 
 steps of which were discernible by the 
 moonlight, while the rest were lost in utter 
 darkness. Though it was difficult to con-
<#PG# 66>

 
 
 ceive that the persons whom I had followed 
 would have ventured to pass through this 
 gloomy opening, yet to account for their 
 disappearance otherwise was still more 
 difficult. At all events, my curiosity was 
 now too eager in the chase to relinquish 
 it ; — the spirit of adventure, once raised, 
 could not be so easily laid. Accordingly, 
 having sent up a gay prayer to that bliss- 
 loving Queen whose eye alone w^as upon 
 me, I passed through the portal, and de- 
 scended into the pyramid. 
 
 ij 4
<#PG# 67>

 
 
 CHAP. VI. 
 
 At the bottom of the stair-way I found 
 myself m a low, narrow passage, through 
 which, without stooping almost to the earth, 
 it was impossible to proceed. Though 
 leading through a multiplicity of dark 
 windings, this way seemed but little to 
 advance my progress, — its course, I per- 
 ceived, being chiefly circular, and gather- 
 ing, at every turn, but a deeper intensity 
 of darkness. 
 
 " Can this," I thought, " be the sojourn 
 of any thing human ?" — and had scarcely 
 asked myself the question, when the path 
 opened into a long gallery, at the farthest 
 end of which a gleam of light was visible. 
 This welcome glimmer appeared to come 
 from some cell or alcove, in which the 
 right-hand wall of the gallery terminated,
<#PG# 68>

 
 
 and, breathless with expectation, I stole 
 gently towards it. 
 
 Arrived at the end of the gallery, a scene 
 presented itself to my eyes, for which my 
 fondest expectations of adventure could not 
 have prepared me. The place from which 
 the light proceeded was a small chapel, of 
 whose interior, from the dark recess in 
 which I stood, I had, unseen myself, a full 
 and distinct view. Over the walls of this 
 oratory were painted some of those various 
 symbols, by which the mystic wisdom of 
 the Egyptians loves to shadow out the 
 History of the Soul, — the winged globe 
 with a serpent — the rays descending from 
 above, like a glory — and the Theban beetle, 
 as he comes forth after the waters have 
 passed away, and the first sunbeam falls 
 on his regenerated wings. 
 
 In the middle of the chapel, on a low 
 altar of granite, lay a lifeless female form, 
 enshrined within a case of crystal, — as 
 it is the custom to preserve the dead in 
 Ethiopia, — andlooking as freshly beautiful 
 
 D 5
<#PG# 69>

 
 
 as if the soul had but a few hours departed. 
 Among the emblems of death, on the front 
 of the altar, were a slender lotus branch 
 broken in two, and a bird just winging 
 its flight from the spray. 
 
 To these memorials of the dead, how- 
 ever, I paid but little attention ; for there 
 was a living object there upon which my 
 eyes were most intently fixed. 
 
 The lamp, by which the whole of the 
 chapel was illuminated, was placed ;it the 
 head of the pale image in the shrine ; and, 
 between its light and me, stood a female 
 form, bending over the monument, as if to 
 gaze upon the silent features within. The 
 position in which this figure was placed, in- 
 tercepting a strong light, afforded me, at 
 first, but an imperfect and shadowy view of 
 it. Yet even at this mere outline I felt 
 my heart beat high, — and memory, as it 
 proved, had as much share in this feeling as 
 imagination. For, on the head changing 
 its position, so as to let a gleam fall on the 
 features, I saw, with a transport which had
<#PG# 70>

 
 
 almost led me to betray my lurking-place, 
 that it was she — the young worshipper of 
 Isis — the same, the very same, whom I had 
 seen, brightening the holy place where she 
 stood, and looking like an inhabitant of" 
 some purer world. 
 
 The movement, by which she had now 
 given me an opportunity of recognising 
 her, was made in raising from the shi'ine a 
 small cross * of silver, which lay directly 
 over the bosom of the lifeless figure. 
 Bringing it close to her lips, she kissed it 
 with a religious fervour ; then, turning her 
 eyes mournfully upwards, held them fixed 
 with a degree of inspired earnestness, as if, 
 at that moment, in direct communion with 
 Heaven, they saw neither roof, nor any 
 other earthly barrier between them and 
 the skies. 
 
 What a power is there in innocence, 
 whose very helplessness is its safeguard — 
 in whose presence even Passion himself 
 
 * A cross was, among the Egyptians, the emblem 
 of a future life. 
 
 D 6
<#PG# 71>

 
 
 stands abashed, and turns worshipper at 
 the altar which he came to despoil. She, 
 who, but a short hour before, had pre- 
 sented herself to my imagination as some- 
 thing I could have risked immortality to 
 win — she, whom gladly, from the floor of 
 lier own lighted temple, in the very face 
 of its proud ministers, I would have borne 
 away in triumph, and defied all punish- 
 ments, both human and sacred, to make 
 her mine, — she was now before me, 
 thrown, as if by fate itself, into my power 
 — standing there, beautiful and alone, 
 with nothing but her innocence for her 
 guard ! Yet, no — so touching was the 
 purity of the whole scene, so calm and 
 august that protection which the dead 
 seemed to extend over the living, that 
 every earthly feeling was forgotten as I 
 gazed, and love itself became exalted into 
 reverence. 
 
 Entranced, indeed, as I felt in witness- 
 ing such a scene, thus to enjoy it by stealth 
 seemed a wrong, a sacrilege — and, rather
<#PG# 72>

 
 
 than let her eyes meet the flash of mine, 
 or disturb, by a whisper, that sacred silence, 
 in which Youth and Death held commu- 
 nion through Love, I would have let my 
 heart break, without a murmur, where 
 I stood. Gendy, as if life depended upon 
 every movement, I stole away from that 
 tranquil and holy scene — leaving it still 
 tranquil and holy as I found it — and, 
 gliding back through the same passages 
 and windings by which I had entered, re- 
 gained the narrow stair-way, and again 
 ascended into light. 
 
 Tlie sun had just risen, and, from the 
 summit of the Arabian hills, was pouring 
 down his beams into that vast valley of 
 waters, — as if proud of the homage 
 that had been paid to his own Isis, now 
 fading away in the superior light of her 
 Lord. My first impulse was to fly from 
 this dangerous spot, and in new loves 
 and pleasures seek forgetfulness of the 
 scene which I had witnessed. " Once 
 out of the circle of this enchantment," I
<#PG# 73>

 
 
 exclaimed, " I know my own suscepti- 
 bility to new impressions too well, to 
 doubt that I shall soon break the spell 
 that is around me." 
 
 But vain were my efforts and resolves. 
 Even while I swore to fly, my steps were 
 still lingering round the pyramid — my 
 eyes still turned towards the secret portal 
 which severed this enchantress from the 
 world of the living. Hour after hour did 
 I wander through that City of Silence, — 
 till, already, it was noon, and, under the 
 eye of the sun, the mighty pyramid of 
 pyramids stood, like a great spirit, sha- 
 dowless. 
 
 Again did those wild and passionate 
 feelings, which, for a moment, her presence 
 had subdued into reverence, return to 
 kindle up my imagination and senses. 
 I even reproached myself for the awe, 
 that had held me spell-bound before her. 
 " What would my companions of the 
 Garden say, did they know that their 
 chief, — he whose path Love had strewed
<#PG# 74>

 
 
 with trophies — was now pining for a 
 simple Egyptian girl, in whose presence 
 he had not dared to give utterance to a 
 sigh, and who had vanquished the victor, 
 without even knowing her triumph ! " 
 
 A bhish came over my cheek at the 
 humihating thought, and my determin- 
 ation was fixed to await her coming. 
 That she should be an inmate of those 
 gloomy caverns seemed inconceivable ; 
 nor did there appear to be any issue from 
 their depths but by the pyramid. Again, 
 therefore, like a sentinel of the dead, did 
 I pace up and down among these tombs, 
 contrasting, in many a mournful reflection, 
 the burning fever within my own veins 
 with the cold quiet of those who slept 
 around. 
 
 At length the fierce glow of the sun 
 over my head, and, still more, that 
 ever restless agitation in my heart, were 
 too much for even strength like mine to 
 bear. Exhausted, I lay down at the base 
 of the pyramid — placing myself directly
<#PG# 75>

 
 
 under the portal, where, even should 
 slumber surprise me, my heart, if not my 
 ear, might still be on the watch, and her 
 footstep, light as it was, could not fail to 
 awake me. 
 
 After many an ineffectual struggle against 
 drowsiness, I at length sunk into sleep — 
 but not into forgetful ness. The same 
 image still haunted me, in every variety of 
 shajie, with which imagination, assisted by 
 memory, could invest it. Now, like Neitha, 
 upon her throne at Sais, she seemed to sit, 
 with the veil just raised from that brow, 
 which mortal had never, till then, beheld, 
 — and now, like the beautiful enchantress 
 Rhodope, I saw her rise out of the 
 pyramid in which she had dwelt for 
 ages, — 
 
 " Fair Rhodope, as story tells. 
 
 The bright, unearthly njTiiph, who dwells 
 'Mid sunless gold and jewels hid, 
 The Lady of the Pyramid ! " 
 
 So long, amid that unbroken silence, 
 did my sleep continue, that 1 found the
<#PG# 76>

 
 
 moon again shining above the horizon 
 when I awoke. All around was silent and 
 lifeless as before, nor did a print upon the 
 herbage betray that any foot had passed 
 it since my own. Refreshed by rest, and 
 with a fancy still more excited by the mys- 
 tic wonders of which I had been dreaming, 
 I now resolved to revisit the chapel in the 
 pyramid, and put an end, if possible, to this 
 illusion that haunted me. 
 
 Having learned, from the experience of 
 the preceding night, the inconvenience of 
 encounterhig those labyrinths without a 
 light, I now hastened to provide myself 
 with a lamp from my boat. Tracking my 
 way back with some difficulty to the shore, 
 I there found, not only my lamp, but some 
 dates and dried fruits, with a store of 
 which, for my roving life upon the waters, 
 I was always supplied, — and which now, 
 after so many hours of abstinence, were a 
 welcome and necessary relief. 
 
 Thus prepared, I again ascended the 
 pyramid, and was proceeding to search
<#PG# 77>

 
 
 out the secret spring, when a loud, dismal 
 noise was heard at a distance, to which all 
 the echoes of the cemetery answered. It 
 came, I knew, from the Great Temple on 
 the shore of the lake, and was the shriek 
 which its gates — the Gates of Oblivion, as 
 they are called — sent forth from their 
 hinges, in opening at night, to receive 
 within their precincts the newly-landed 
 dead. 
 
 I had heard that sound before, and 
 always with sadness ; but, at this moment, 
 it thrilled through me like a voice of ill 
 omen, and I almost doubted whether I 
 should not abandon my enterprise. The 
 hesitation, however, was but momentary; 
 — even while it passed through my mind, 
 I had touched the spring of the portal. 
 In a few seconds more, I was again in the 
 passage beneath the pyramid ; and, being 
 enabled by my lamp to follow the wind- 
 ings of the way more rapidly, soon found 
 myself at the door of the small chapel in 
 the gallery.
<#PG# 78>

 
 
 I entered, still awed, though there was 
 now nothing living within. The young 
 Priestess had fled — had vanished, like a 
 spirit, into the darkness. All the rest was 
 as I had left it on the preceding night. 
 The lamp still stood burning upon the 
 crystal shrine — the cross lay where the 
 hands of the young mourner had placed 
 it, and the cold image beneath wore the 
 same tranquil look, as if resigned to the 
 solitude of death, — of all lone things the 
 loneliest. Remembering the lips that I 
 had seen kiss that cross, and kmdling with 
 the recollection, I raised it passionately to 
 my own; — but, at the same moment, I 
 fancied the dead eyes met mine, and, 
 saddened in the midst of my ardour, I re- 
 placed the cross upon the shrine. 
 
 I had now lost all clue to the object of 
 my pursuit, and was preparing slowly to 
 I'etrace my steps to earth, with that gloomy 
 satisfaction which certainty, even when 
 unwelcome, brings, — when, as I held 
 forth my lamp, on leaving the chapel, I
<#PG# 79>

 
 
 could perceive that the gallery, instead of 
 terminating here, topk a sudden bend to 
 the left, which had before eluded my eye, 
 and which gave a promise of leading still 
 further into those recesses. Re-animated 
 by this discovery, which opened a new 
 source of hope to my heart, I cast but one 
 hesitating look at my lamp, as if to ask 
 whether it would be faithful through the 
 gloom I was about to encounter, and, 
 without further thought, rushed eagerly 
 forward.
<#PG# 80>

 
 
 CHAP. VII. 
 
 The path led, for some time, through the 
 same sort of narrow windings as those 
 which I had encountered in descending 
 the stair-way ; and at length opened, in a 
 similar manner, into a straight and steep 
 gallery, along each side of which stood, 
 closely ranged and upright, a file of life- 
 less bodies, whose glassy eyes threw a 
 preternatural glare upon me as I passed. 
 
 Arrived at the end of this gallery, I 
 found my hopes a second time vanish. 
 The path, I perceived, extended no fur- 
 ther. The only object that I could dis- 
 cern, by the glimmering of my lamp, which 
 now, every minute, burned fainter and 
 fainter, was the mouth of a huge well, that 
 lay gaping before me — a reservoir of 
 darkness, black and unfathomable. It now 
 crossed my memory that I had heard of 
 such wells, as being used occasionally for
<#PG# 81>

 
 
 passages by the priests. Leaning down, 
 therefore, over the edge, I looked anx- 
 iously within, to discover whether it was 
 possible to descend into the chasm; but 
 the sides were hard and smooth as glass, 
 being varnished all over with that dark 
 pitch, which the Dead Sea throws out on 
 its slimy shore. 
 
 After a more attentive scrutiny, how- 
 ever, I observed, at the depth of a few 
 feet, a sort of iron step, projecting dimly 
 from the side, and, below it, another, 
 which, though hardly perceptible, was just 
 sufficient to encourage an adventurous foot 
 to the trial. Thoug4i all hope of tracing 
 the young Priestess was at an end, — it 
 being impossible that female foot should 
 have dared this descent, — yet, as I hud 
 so far engaged in the adventure, and there 
 was, at least, a mystery to be unravelled, 
 I determined, at all hazards, to explore 
 the chasm. Placing my lamp (which was 
 hollowed at the bottom, so as to fit like a 
 helmet) firmly on my head, and having
<#PG# 82>

 
 
 thus both hands at Hberty foi' exertion, I 
 set my foot cautiously on the iron step, 
 and descended into the well. 
 
 I found the same footing, at regular in- 
 tervals, to a considerable depth ; and had 
 already counted near a hundred of these 
 steps, when the ladder altogether ceased, 
 and I could descend no further. In vain 
 did I stretch down my foot in search of 
 support — the hard, slippery sides were 
 all that it encountered. At length, stoop- 
 ing my head, so as to let the light fall 
 below, I observed an opening or window 
 directly above the step on which I stood, 
 and, taking for granted that the way must 
 lie in that direction, with some little diffi- 
 culty clambered through the aperture. 
 
 I now found myself on a rude and nar- 
 row stair-way, the steps of which were cut 
 out of the living rock, and wound spirally 
 downward in the same direction as the 
 well. Almost dizzy with the descent, 
 which seemed as if it would never end, I, 
 at last, reached the bottom, where a pair
<#PG# 83>

 
 
 of massy iron gates closed directly across 
 my path, as if to forbid any further pro- 
 gress. Massy, however, and gigantic as 
 these were, I found, to my surprise, that 
 the hand of an infant might have opened 
 them with ease — so readily did their great 
 folds give way to my touch, 
 
 " Light as a lime-bush, that receives 
 Some wandering bird among its leaves." 
 
 No sooner, however, had I passed through, 
 than the din, with which the gates clashed 
 together again, was such as might have 
 awakened death itself. It seemed as if every 
 echo throughout that vast, subterranean 
 world, from the Catacombs of Alexan- 
 dria to Thebes's Valley of Kings, had 
 caught up and repeated the thundering 
 sound. 
 
 Startled, however, as I was, not even this 
 supernatural clangoiu* could divert my at- 
 tention from the light that now broke upon 
 me — soft, warm, and welcome as are the 
 stars of his own South to the mariner
<#PG# 84>

 
 
 who has been wandering through the seas 
 of the north. Looking for the source of 
 this splendour, I saw, through an arch- 
 way opposite, a long illuminated alley, 
 stretching away as far as the eye could 
 reach, and fenced, on one side, with 
 thickets of odoriferous shrubs, while, 
 along the other extended a line of lofty 
 arcades, from which the light, that filled 
 the whole area, issued. As soon, too, 
 as the din of the deep echoes had sub- 
 sided, there stole gradually on my ear 
 a strain of choral music, which appeared 
 to come mellowed and sweetened in its 
 passage, through many a spacious hall 
 within those shining arcades. Amonar the 
 voices I could distinguish some female 
 tones, towering high and clear over all 
 the rest, and forming the spire, as it 
 were, into which the harmony tapered, as 
 it rose. 
 
 So excited was my fancy by this sudden 
 enchantment, that — though never had I 
 caught a sound from the young Egyptian's 
 
 £
<#PG# 85>

 
 
 lips, — I yet persuaded myself that the voice 
 I now heard was hers, soundinof highest 
 and most heavenly of all that chou", and 
 calling to me, like a distant spirit out of its 
 sphere. Animated by this thought, I flew 
 forward to the archway, but found, to my 
 mortification, that it was guarded by a 
 trellis-work, whose bars, though invisible 
 at a distance, resisted all my efforts to 
 force them. 
 
 While occupied in these ineffectual 
 struggles, I perceived, to the left of the 
 archway, a dark, cavernous opening, which 
 seemed to lead in a direction parallel to 
 the lighted arcades. Notwithstanding my 
 impatience, however, the aspect of this 
 passage, as I looked shudderingly into it, 
 chilled my very blood. It was not so much 
 darkness, as a sort of livid and ghastly 
 twilight, from which a damp, like that of 
 death-vaults, exhaled, and through which, 
 if my eyes did not deceive me, pale, phan- 
 tom-like shapes were, at that very moment, 
 hovering.
<#PG# 86>

 
 
 Looking anxiously round, to discover 
 some less formidable outlet, I saw, over 
 the vast folding-gates through which I 
 had just passed, a blue, tremulous flame, 
 which, after playing for a few seconds 
 over the dark ground of the pediment, 
 settled gradually into characters of light, 
 and formed the following words : — 
 
 You, who would try 
 
 Yon terrible track, 
 To live, or to die, 
 
 But ne'er to look back — 
 
 You, who aspire 
 
 To be purified there, 
 By the terrors of Fire, 
 
 Of Water, and Air, — 
 
 If danger, and pain, 
 And death you despise. 
 
 On — for again 
 
 Into light you shall rise ; 
 
 Rise into light 
 
 With that Secret Divine, 
 Now shrouded from sight 
 
 By the Veils of the Shrine ! 
 
 But if
<#PG# 87>

 
 
 Here the letters faded away into a dead 
 blank, more awfully intelligible than the 
 most eloquent words. 
 
 A new hope now flashed across me. 
 The dream of the Garden, which had 
 been for some time almost forgotten, re- 
 turned to my mind. " Am I then," I 
 exclaimed, " in the path to the promised 
 mystery? and shall the great secret of 
 Eternal Life indeed be mine ? " 
 
 " Yes ! " seemed to answer out of the 
 air, that spirit-voice, which still was heard 
 crownino; the choir with its sinjjle sweet- 
 ness. I hailed the omen with transport. 
 Love and Immortality, both beckoning 
 me onward — who could give a thought 
 to fear, with two such bright hopes in 
 view ? Having invoked and blessed 
 that unknown enchantress, whose steps 
 had led me to this abode of mystery and 
 knowledge, I plunged into the chasm. 
 
 Instead of that vague, spectral twilight 
 which had at first met my eye, I now 
 found, as I entered, a thick darkness,
<#PG# 88>

 
 
 wliich, though far less horrible, was, at 
 this moment, still more disconcerting, 
 as my lamp, which had been, for some 
 time, almost useless, was fast expiring. 
 Resolved, however, to make the most 
 of its last gleam, I hastened, with rapid 
 step, through this gloomy region, which 
 seemed wider and more open to the air 
 than any that I had yet passed. Nor 
 was it long before the appearance of a 
 bright blaze in the distance announced 
 to me that my first great Trial was at 
 hand. As I drew nearer, the flames 
 burst high and wide on all sides ; — and 
 the spectacle that now presented itself 
 was such as might have appalled even 
 hearts more habituated to dangers than 
 mine. 
 
 There lay before me, extending com- 
 pletely across my path, a thicket, or grove 
 of the most combustible trees of Egypt 
 — tamarind, pine, and Arabian balm. 
 Around their stems and branches were 
 coiled serpents of fire, which, twisting 
 
 E 3
<#PG# 89>

 
 
 themselves rapidly from bough to bough, 
 spread the contagion of their own wild-fire 
 as they went, and involved tree after tree 
 in one general blaze. It was, indeed, rapid 
 as the burning of those reed-beds of Ethio- 
 pia, whose hght brightens, at night, the 
 distant cataracts of the Nile. 
 
 Through the middle of this blazing grove, 
 I now perceived, my only pathway lay. 
 There was not a moment to be lost — the 
 conflagration gained rapidly on either side, 
 and already the narrowing path between 
 was strewed with fire. Casting away my 
 now useless lamp, and holding my robe 
 as some protection over my head, with a 
 tremor, I owti, in every limb, I ventured 
 through the blaze. 
 
 Instantly, as if my presence had given 
 new life to the flames, a fresh outbreak 
 of combustion arose on all sides. The 
 trees clustered into a bower of fire above 
 ray head, while the serpents that hung 
 hissing from the red branches, shot show- 
 ers of sparkles down upon me, as I passed.
<#PG# 90>

 
 
 Never were decision and activity more ser- 
 viceable ; — one minute later, and I must 
 have perished. The narrow opening, of 
 which I had so promptly availed myself, 
 closed instantly behind me ; and, as I 
 looked back, to contemplate the ordeal 
 which I had passed, I saw that the whole 
 grove was already one mass of fire. 
 
 Happy at having escaped this first trial, 
 I plucked from one of the pine-trees a 
 bough that was but just kindled, and, with 
 this for my only guide, hastened breath- 
 lessly forward. I had gone but a few 
 paces, when the path turned suddenly off, 
 — leading downwards, as I could perceive 
 by the glimmer of my brand, into a more 
 confined space, through which a chilling 
 air, as if from some neighbouring waters, 
 blew over my brow. Nor had I pro- 
 ceeded very far, when the sound of tor- 
 rents, — mingled, as I thought, from time 
 to time, with shrill wailings, like the cries 
 of persons in danger or distress, — fell upon 
 
 E 4
<#PG# 91>

 
 
 my ear. At every step the noise of the 
 dashing waters increased, and I now per- 
 ceived that I had entered an immense 
 rocky cavern, tli rough the middle of 
 which, headlong as a winter-torrent, the 
 flood, to whose roar I had been listening, 
 rushed. Upon its surface, too, there 
 floated strange, spectre-like shapes, which 
 as they went by, sent forth those dismal 
 shrieks, — as if in fear of some precipice 
 to whose brink they were hurrying. 
 
 I saw too plainly that my course must 
 be across that torrent. It was fearful ; but 
 in courage lay my only hope. What 
 awaited me on the opposite shore, I knew 
 not; for all there was wrapped in im- 
 penetrable gloom, nor could the feeble 
 light I held reach half so far. Dismiss- 
 ing, however, all thoughts but that of 
 pressing onward, I sprung from the rock 
 on which I stood into the flood, — trust- 
 ing that, with my right hand, I should be 
 able to buffet the current, while, with 
 the other, I might contrive to hold the
<#PG# 92>

 
 
 brand aloft, — as long as a glimmer of it 
 remained, — to guide me to the shore. 
 
 Long, formidable, and almost hopeless 
 was the struggle I had now to maintain. 
 More than once, indeed, overpowered by 
 the rush of the waters, I had given myself 
 up, as destined to follow those apparitions, 
 that still passed me, hurrying on, with 
 mournful cries, to their doom in some in- 
 visible gulf beyond. 
 
 At length, just as my strength was 
 nearly exhausted, and the last remains of 
 the pine-branch were falling from my hand, 
 I saw, outstretching towards me into the 
 water, a light double balustrade, with a 
 flight of steps between, ascending, almost 
 perpendicularly, from the wave, till they 
 seemed lost in a dense mass of clouds 
 above. This glimpse — for it was no 
 more, as my light expired in giving it — 
 lent new spring to my courage. Having 
 now both hands at liberty, so despe- 
 rate were my efforts, that after a few 
 minutes' struggle, I felt my brow strike 
 E 5
<#PG# 93>

 
 
 against the stairway, and, in another in- 
 stant, my feet were on the steps. 
 
 Rejoiced at my rescue from that perilous 
 flood, though I knew not whither the 
 stairway led, I promptly ascended it. 
 But this feeling of confidence was of short 
 duration. I had not mounted far, when, 
 to my horror, I perceived, that each suc- 
 cessive step, as my foot left it, broke away 
 from beneath me, — leaving me in mid-air, 
 with no other alternative ^han that of still 
 continuing to mount by the same moment- 
 ary footing, and with the dreadful doubt 
 whether it would even endure my tread. 
 
 And thus did I, for a few seconds, 
 ascend, with nothing beneath me but that 
 awful river, in which — so tranquil had it 
 become — I could hear the plash of the 
 falling fragments, as every step in suc- 
 cession gave way under my feet. It was 
 a trying moment, — but even still worse 
 remained. I now found the balustrade, 
 by which I had held during my ascent, 
 and which had hitherto seemed firm,
<#PG# 94>

 
 
 grow tremulous in my hand, — while the 
 step, to which I was about to trust my- 
 self, tottered under my foot. Just then, 
 a momentary flash, as if of lightning, 
 broke around, and I saw, hanging out 
 of the clouds, within my reach, a huge 
 brazen ring. Instinctively I stretched forth 
 my arm to seize it, and, at the same in- 
 stant, both balustrade and steps gave way 
 beneath me, and I was left swuiging by 
 my hands in the dark void. As if, too, 
 this massy ring, which I grasped, was by 
 some magic power linked with all the 
 winds in heaven, no sooner had I seized 
 it than, like the touching of a spring, 
 it seemed to give loose to every variety of 
 gusts and tempests, that ever strewed the 
 sea-shore with wrecks or dead ; and, as I 
 swung about, the sport of this elemental 
 strife, every new burst of its fury threatened 
 to shiver me, like a storm-sail, to atoms ! 
 
 Nor was even this the worst; — still 
 holding, I know not how, by the ring, I 
 felt myself caught up, as if by a thousand 
 E 6
<#PG# 95>

 
 
 whirlwinds, and round and round, like a 
 stone-shot in a sling, whirled in the midst 
 of all this deafening chaos, till my brain 
 grew dizzy, and my recollection confused, 
 and I almost fancied myself on that wheel 
 of the infernal world, whose rotations, it 
 is said, Eternity alone can number ! 
 
 Human strength could no longer sus- 
 tain such a trial. I was on the point, 
 at last, of loosing my hold, when suddenly 
 the violence of the storm moderated; — 
 my whirl through the air gradually ceased, 
 and I felt the ring slowly descend with 
 me, till — happy as a shipwrecked mari- 
 ner at the first touch of land — I found 
 my feet once more upon firm ground. 
 
 At the same moment, a light of the 
 most delicious softness filled the whole air. 
 Music, such as is heard in dreams, came 
 floating at a distance ; and as my eyes gra- 
 dually recovered their powers of vision, 
 a scene of glory was revealed to them, 
 almost too bright for imagination, and 
 yet living and real. As far as the sight
<#PG# 96>

 
 
 could reach, enchanting gardens were 
 seen, opening away through long tracts 
 of light and verdure, and sparkling every 
 where with fountains, that circulated, like 
 streams of life, among the flowers. Not 
 a charm was here wanting, that the imagin- 
 ation of poet or prophet, in their brightest 
 pictures of Elysium, have ever dreamed or 
 promised. Vistas, opening into scenes of 
 indistinct grandeur, — streams, shining out 
 at intervals, in their shadowy course, — 
 and labyrinths of flowers, leading, by 
 mysterious windings, to green, spacious 
 glades full of splendour and repose. Over 
 all this, too, there fell a light, from some 
 unseen source, resembling nothing that 
 illumines our upper world — a sort of 
 golden moonlight, mingling the warm 
 radiance of day with the calm and melan- 
 choly lustre of night. 
 
 Nor were there wanting inhabitants for 
 this sunless Paradise. Through all the 
 bright gardens were wandering, with the 
 serene air and step of happy spirits, groups
<#PG# 97>

 
 
 both of young and old, of venerable and of 
 lovely forms, bearing, most of them, the 
 Nile's white flowers on their heads, and 
 branches of the eternal palm in their 
 hands; while, over the verdant turf, fair 
 children and maidens went dancing to 
 aerial music, whose source was, like that 
 of the light, invisible, but which filled 
 the whole air with its mystic sweetness. 
 
 Exhausted as I was by the painful trials 
 I had undergone, no sooner did 1 perceive 
 those fair groups in the distance, than my 
 weariness, both of frame and spirit, was for- 
 gotten. A thought crossed me that she, whom 
 I sought, might haply be among them; 
 and notwithstanding the awe, with which 
 that unearthly scene inspired me, I was 
 about to fly, on the instant, to ascertain my 
 hope. But in the act of making the effort, 
 I felt my robe gently pulled, and turning, 
 beheld an aged man before me, whom, by 
 the sacred hue of his garb, I knew to be 
 a Hierophant. Placing a branch of the 
 consecrated palm in my hand, he said,
<#PG# 98>

 
 
 in a solemn voice, " Aspirant of the Mys- 
 teries, welcome ! " — then, regarding me 
 for a few seconds with grave attention, 
 added, in a tone of courteousness and in- 
 terest, " The victory over the body hath 
 been gained ! — Follow me, young Greek, 
 to thy resting place." 
 
 I obeyed in silence, — and the Priest, 
 turning away from this scene of splendour, 
 into a secluded path, where the light faded 
 away, as we advanced, conducted me to a 
 small pavilion, by the side of a whisper- 
 ing stream, where the very spu'it of slum- 
 ber seemed to preside, and, pointing to 
 a bed of dried poppy-leaves within, left 
 me to repose.
<#PG# 99>

 
 
 CHAP. VIII. 
 
 Though the sight of that splendid scene 
 which opened upon me, Hke a momentary 
 glimpse into another world, had, for an in- 
 stant, i-e-animated my strength and spirit, 
 so completely was my whole frame subdued 
 by fatigue, that, even had the form of 
 the young Priestess stood before me, my 
 limbs would have sunk in the effort to 
 reach her. No sooner had I fallen on my 
 leafy couch, than sleep, like a sudden 
 death, came over me ; and I lay, for hours, 
 in the deep, and motionless rest, which not 
 even a shadow of life disturbs. 
 
 On awaking I saw, beside me, the same 
 venerable personage, who had welcomed 
 me to this subterranean world on the pre- 
 ceding night. At the foot of my couch stood 
 a statue, of Grecian workmanship, repre- 
 senting a boy, with wings, seated gracefully
<#PG# 100>

 
 
 on a lotus-flower, and having the fore- 
 finger of his right hand pressed to his hps. 
 This action, together with the glory round 
 his brows, denoted, as I already knew, the 
 God of Silence and Light. 
 
 Impatient to know what further trials 
 awaited me, I was about to speak, when 
 the Priest exclaimed, anxiously, " Hush ! " 
 — and, pointing to the statue at the foot 
 of the couch, said— " Let the spell of that 
 Spirit be on thy lips, young stranger, till 
 the wisdom of thy instructors shall think 
 fit to remove it. Not unaptly doth the same 
 deity preside over Silence and Light ; since 
 it is only out of the depth of contemplative 
 silence, that the great light of the soul. 
 Truth, arises ! " 
 
 Little used to the language of dictation 
 or instruction, I was now preparing to rise, 
 when the priest again restrained me ; and, 
 at the same moment, two boys, beautiful as 
 the young Genii of the stars, entered the 
 pavilion. They were habited in long 
 garments of the purest white, and bore
<#PG# 101>

 
 
 each a small golden chalice in his hand. 
 Advancing towards me, they stopped on 
 opposite sides of the couch, and one of 
 them, presenting to me his chalice of gold, 
 said, in a tone between smging and speak- 
 ing' — 
 
 " Drink of this cup — Osii'is sips 
 The same in his halls below ; 
 And the same he gives, to cool the lips 
 Of the Dead who downward go. 
 
 " Drink of this cup — the water within 
 Is fresh from Lethe's stream ; 
 'Twill make the past, with all its sin. 
 And all its pain and sorrows, seem 
 Like a long-forgotten dream ! 
 
 " The pleasure, whose charms 
 Are steep'd in woe ; 
 The knowledge, that harms 
 The soul to know ; 
 
 " The hope, that, bright 
 
 As the lake of the waste. 
 Allures the sight. 
 But mocks the taste ; ,
<#PG# 102>

 
 
 " The love that binds 
 Its mnocent wreath, 
 Where the serpent winds, 
 In venom, beneath ; — 
 
 " All that, of evil or false, by thee 
 Hath ever been known or seen, 
 Shall melt away in this cup, and be 
 Forgot, as it never had been ! " 
 
 Unwilliiifj to throw a slight on this 
 strange ceremony, I leaned forward, with 
 all due gravity, and tasted the cup ; 
 which I had no sooner done than the 
 young cup-bearer, on the other side? 
 mvited my attention ; and, in his turn, 
 presenting the chalice which he held, 
 sung, with a voice still sweeter than that 
 of his companion, the following strain : — 
 
 " Drink of this cup — when Isis led 
 
 Her boy, of old to the beaming sky. 
 She mingled a di'aught divine, and said — 
 • Drink of this cup, thou 'It never die ! ' 
 
 " Thus do I say and sing to thee. 
 
 Heir of that boundless heav'n on high, 
 
 Though frail, and fall'n, and lost thou be. 
 
 Drink of this cup, thou 'It never die ! "
<#PG# 103>

 
 
 Much as I had endeavoured to keep my 
 philosophy on its guard, against the illu- 
 sions with which, I knew, this region 
 abounded, the young cup-bearer had here 
 touched a spring of imagination, over 
 which, as has been seen, my philosophy 
 had but Uttle control. No sooner had 
 the words, " thou shalt never die," struck 
 on my ear, than the dream of the Garden 
 came fully to my mind, and, starting half- 
 way from the couch, I stretched forth my 
 hands to the cup. Recollecting myself, 
 however, and fearful of having betrayed 
 to others a weakness only fit for my own 
 secret indulgence, with an affected smile 
 of indifference I sunk back again on my 
 couch, — while the young minstrel, but 
 little interrupted by my movement, still 
 continued his strain, of which I heard but 
 the concluding words : — 
 
 " And Memory, too, with her dreams shall come. 
 Dreams of a former, happier day, 
 When Heaven was still the Spirit's home, 
 And her wings had not yet fallen away ;
<#PG# 104>

 
 
 " Glimpses of glory, ne'er forgot, 
 
 That tell like gleams on a sunset sea, 
 What once hath been, what now is not. 
 But, oh, what again shall brightly be ! " 
 
 Though the assurances of immortality 
 contained in these verses, would at any 
 other moment, — vain and visionary as I 
 thought them, — have sent my fancy wan- 
 dering into reveries of the future, the 
 effort of self-control I had just made en- 
 abled me to hear them with indiflference. 
 
 Having gone throuj;h the form of tasting 
 this second cup, I again looked anxiously 
 to the Hierophant, to ascertain whether I 
 might be permitted to rise. His assent 
 having been given, the young pages brought 
 to my couch a robe and tunic, which, like 
 their own, were of linen of the purest 
 white ; and having assisted to clothe me in 
 this sacred garb, they then placed upon 
 my head a chaplet of myrtle, in which the 
 symbol of Initiation, a golden grasshopper, 
 was seen shining out from among the dark 
 leaves.
<#PG# 105>

 
 
 Though sleep had done much to refresh 
 my frame, something more was still wanting 
 to restore its strength; and it was not 
 without a smile at my own reveries I 
 reflected, how much more welcome than 
 the young page's cup of immortality was 
 the unpretending, but real, repast now set 
 before me, — fresh fruits from the Isle of 
 Gardens in the Nile, the delicate flesh of 
 the desert antelope, and wine from the 
 Vineyard of the Queens at Anthylla, 
 which one of the pages fanned with a palm- 
 leaf, to keep it cool. 
 
 Having done justice to these dainties, it 
 was with pleasure J heard the proposal of 
 the Priest, that we should walk forth 
 together and meditate among the scenes 
 without. I had not forgotten the elysium 
 that welcomed me last night, — those en- 
 chanted gardens, that mysterious music 
 and light, and the fair forms 1 had seen wan- 
 dering about, — as if, while in the very 
 midst of happiness, still seeking it. The 
 hope, which had then occurred to me, that.
<#PG# 106>

 
 
 perhaps, among those sparkling groups, 
 might be the young maiden I sought, now 
 returned with increased strength. I had 
 little doubt that my guide was about to lead 
 to the same Elysian scene, and that the 
 form, so fit to inhabit it, would again ap- 
 pear before my eyes. 
 
 But far different was the region to which 
 he now conducted me ; — nor could the 
 whole world produce a scene more gloomy, 
 or more strange. It had the appearance of 
 a small, solitary valley, inclosed, on every 
 side, by rocks, which seemed to rise, al- 
 most perpendicularly, to the very sky ; — 
 for it was, indeed, the blue sky that I saw 
 shinins between then- summits, and whose 
 
 o 
 
 light, dimmed and half lost, in its descent 
 thus far, formed the melancholy daylight 
 of this nether world.* Down the side of 
 
 * " On s'etoit meme avise, depuis la premiere 
 construction de ces demeures, de percer en plu- 
 sieurs endroits jusq'au haut les terras qui les cou- 
 vroient ; non pas, a la verite, poiu" tirer un jour qui 
 a'aiu-oit jamais ete suffisant, mais pour recevoir un 
 jair salutaire, &c." — Sethos.
<#PG# 107>

 
 
 these rocky walls fell a cataract, whose 
 source was upon earth, and on whose 
 waters, as they rolled glassily over the 
 edge above, a gleam of radiance rested, 
 that showed how brilliant was the sun- 
 shine they left. From thence, gradually 
 darkening, and broken, in its long de- 
 scent, by alternate chasms and projections, 
 the stream fell, at last, in a pale and thin 
 mist — the phantom of what it had been 
 on earth — into a small lake that lay at 
 the base of the rock to receive it. 
 
 Nothing could be more bleak and sad- 
 dening than the appearance of this lake. 
 The usual ornaments of the waters of 
 Egypt were not wanting : the lotus here up- 
 lifted her silvery flowers, and the crimson 
 flamingo floated over the tide. But they 
 were, neither of them, the same as in the 
 upper world ; — the flower had exchanged 
 its whiteness for a livid hue, and the wings 
 of the bird hung heavy and colourless. 
 Every thing wore the same half-living 
 aspect; and the only sounds that dis-
<#PG# 108>

 
 
 turbed the mournful stillness were the 
 wailing cry of a heron among the sedges, 
 and that din of the waters, in their midway 
 struggle, above. 
 
 There was an unearthly sadness in the 
 whole scene, of which no heart, however 
 light, could resist the influence. Per- 
 ceiving how I was affected by it, " Such 
 scenes," said the Priest, " are best suited to 
 that solemn complexion of mind, which 
 becomes him who approaches the Great 
 Secret of futurity. Behold," — and, in 
 saying thus, he pointed to the opening over , 
 our heads, through which, though the sun 
 had but just passed his meridian, I could 
 perceive a star or two twinkling in the 
 heavens, — " as from this gloomy depth 
 we can see those stars, which are now 
 invisible to the dwellers upon the bright 
 earth, even so, to the sad and self-humbled 
 spirit, doth many a mystery of heaven 
 reveal itself, of which they, who walk in 
 the light of the proud world, know not ! " 
 
 F
<#PG# 109>

 
 
 He now led me towards a rustic seat or 
 alcove, beside which stood an image of 
 that dark Deity, that God without a smile, 
 who presides over the kingdom of the 
 Dead. * The same livid and lifeless hue 
 was upon his features, that hung over every 
 thing in this dim valley; and, with his 
 right hand, he pointed directly down- 
 wards, to denote tjjat his melancholy 
 kingdom lay there. A plantain — that 
 favourite tree of the genii of Death — 
 stood behind the statue, and spread its 
 branches over the alcove, in which the 
 Priest now, seating himself, signified that 
 I should take my place by his side. 
 
 After a long pause, as if of thought and 
 preparation, — "Nobly," said he, "young 
 Greek, hast thou sustained the first trials 
 of Initiation. What remains, though of 
 vital import to the soul, brings with it 
 neither pain nor peril to the body. Having 
 now proved and chastened thy mortal 
 frame, by the three ordeals of Fire, of 
 * Osiris.
<#PG# 110>

 
 
 Water, and of Air, the next task to which 
 we are called is the purification of thy 
 spirit, — the cleansing of that inward and 
 immortal part, so as to render it fit for the 
 reception of the last luminous revealment, 
 when the Veils of the Sanctuary shall be 
 thrown aside, and the Great Secret of 
 Secrets unfolded to thy view ! — Towards 
 this object, the primary and most essential 
 step is, instruction. What the three puri- 
 fying elements, through which thou hast 
 passed, have done for thy body, instruction 
 will effect for " 
 
 " But that lovely maiden !" I exclaimed, 
 bursting from my silence, having fallen, 
 during his speech, into a deep revery, iii 
 which I had forgotten him, myself, the 
 Great Secret, every thing — but her. 
 
 Startled by this profane interruption, he 
 cast a look of alarm towards the statue, as if 
 fearful lest the God should have heard my 
 words. Then, turning to me, in a tone of 
 mild solemnity, " It is but too plain,'' 
 said he, " that thoughts of the upper 
 
 F 2
<#PG# 111>

 
 
 world, and of its vain delights, still en- 
 gross thee too much, to let the lessons of 
 Truth sink profitably into thy heart. A 
 few hours of meditation amid this solemn 
 scenery — of that wholesome meditation, 
 which purifies, by saddening — may 
 haply dispose thee to receive, with reve- 
 rence, the holy and immortal knowledge 
 that is in store for thee. With this hope 
 I now leave thee to thy own thoughts, and 
 to that God, before whose calm and 
 mournful eye the vanities of the world, 
 from which thou comest, wither ! " 
 
 Thus saying, he turned slowly away, 
 and passing behind the statue, towards 
 which he had pointed during the last sen- 
 tence, suddenly, and as if by enchantment, 
 disappeared from my sight.
<#PG# 112>

 
 
 CHAP. IX. 
 
 Being left to my own solitary thoughts, 
 I had now leisure to reflect, with coolness, 
 on the inconveniences, if not dangers, of 
 the situation into which my love of adven- 
 ture had hurried me. However ready my 
 imagination was to kindle, in its own ideal 
 sphere, I have ever found that, when 
 brought into contact with reality, it as 
 suddenly cooled ; — like those meteors, 
 that seem stars in the air, but, the mo- 
 ment thev touch earth, are extinguished. 
 Such was the disenchantment that now 
 succeeded to the dreams in which I had 
 been indulging. As long as Fancy had 
 the field of the future to herself, even im- 
 mortality did not seem too distant a race 
 for her. But when human instruments 
 interposed, the illusion vanished. From 
 mortal lips the promise of immortality 
 
 F 3
<#PG# 113>

 
 
 seemed a mockery, and imaffination her- 
 self had no wings tliat could carry beyond 
 the grave. 
 
 Nor was this disappointment the only 
 feeling that occupied me ; — the impru- 
 dence of the step, which I had taken, now 
 appeared in its full extent before my eyes. 
 I had here thrown myself into the power 
 of the most artful priesthood in the world, 
 without a chance of being able to escape 
 from their toils, or to resist any machin- 
 ations with which they might beset me. It 
 seemed evident, from the state of preparation 
 in which I had found all that wonderful 
 apparatus, by which the terrors and splen- 
 dours of Initiation are produced, that my 
 descent into the pyramid was not unex- 
 pected. Numerous, indeed, and active as 
 were the spies of the Sacred College of 
 Memphis, there could be but little doubt 
 that all my movements, since my arrival, 
 had been tracked; and the many hours 
 I had passed in watching and wandering 
 round the pyramid, betrayed a curiosity
<#PG# 114>

 
 
 which misfht well inspire these wily priests 
 with the hope of drawing an Epicurean 
 into their superstitious toils. 
 
 I well knew their hatred to the sect 
 of which I was Chief; — that they con- 
 sidered the Epicureans as, next to tin- 
 Christians, the most formidable enemies 
 of their craft and power. " How thought- 
 less, then," 1 exclaimed, " to have placed 
 myself in a situation, where I am equally 
 helpless against their fraud and violence, 
 and must either pretend to be the dupe of 
 their impostures, or submit to become 
 the victim of their vengeance !" Of these 
 alternatives, bitter as they were, the latter 
 appeared by far the more welcome. I 
 blushed even to think of the mockeries 
 to which I already had yielded ; and the 
 prospect of being put through still further 
 ceremonials, and of being tutored and 
 preached to by hypocrites I despised, 
 appeared to me, in my present temper, 
 a trial of patience, to which the flames 
 
 F 4
<#PG# 115>

 
 
 and the whirlwinds I had ah'eady encoun- 
 tered were pastime. 
 
 Often and impatiently did I look up, 
 between those rocky walls, to the briglit 
 sky that appeared to rest upon their sum- 
 mits, as, round and round, through every 
 part of the valley, I endeavoured to find an 
 outlet from its gloomy precincts. But in 
 vain I endeavoured ; — that rocky barrier, 
 which seemed to end but in heaven, inter- 
 posed itself every where. Neither did the 
 image of the young maiden, though con- 
 stantly in my mind, now bring with it the 
 least consolation or hope. Of what avail 
 was it that she, perhaps, was an inhabitant 
 of this region, if I could neither see her 
 smile, nor catch the sound of her voice, — 
 if, while among preaching priests I wasted 
 away my hours, her presence diffused its 
 enchantment elsewhere. 
 
 At length exhausted, I lay down by the 
 brink of the lake, and gave myself up to 
 all the melancholy of my fancy. The
<#PG# 116>

 
 
 pale semblance of daylight, which had 
 hitherto shone around, grew, every mo- 
 ment, more dim and dismal. Even the 
 rich gleam, at the summit of the cascade, 
 had faded ; and the sunshine, like the 
 water, exhausted in its descent, had now 
 dwindled into a ghostly glimmer, far 
 worse than darkness. The birds upon the 
 lake, as if about to die with the dving 
 light, sunk down their heads; and, as I 
 looked to the statue, the deepening shadows 
 gave an expression to its mournful features 
 that chilled my very soul. 
 
 The thought of death, ever ready to 
 present itself to my imagination, now came, 
 with a disheartening weight, such as I had 
 never before felt. I almost fancied myself 
 already in the dark vestibule of the grave, 
 — separated, for ever, from the world 
 above, and with nothing but the blank of 
 an eternal sleep before me. It had often, I 
 knew, happened that the visitants of this 
 mysterious realm were, after their descent 
 
 F 5
<#PG# 117>

 
 
 from earth, never seen or heard of; — 
 being condemned, for some faihn-e in their 
 initiatory trials, to pine away their Hves in 
 the dark dungeons, with which, as well as 
 with altars, this region abounded. Such, 
 I shuddered to think, might probably 
 be my destiny ; and so appalling was the 
 thought, that even the spirit of defiance 
 died within me, and I was already giving 
 myself up to helplessness and despair. 
 
 At length, after some hours of this 
 gloomy musing, I heard a rustling in the 
 sacred grove behind the statue ; and, 
 so*m after, the sound of the Priest's voice 
 — more welcome than I had ever thought 
 •such voice could be — brought the 
 assurance that 1 was not yet, at least, 
 wholly abandoned. Finding his way to 
 me through the gloom, he now led me to 
 the spot, on which we had parted so 
 many hours before ; and, in a voice that 
 retained no trace of displeasure, bespoke 
 my attention, while he should reveal to 
 me some of those divine truths, by whose
<#PG# 118>

 
 
 infusion, he said, into the soul of man, its 
 purification can alone be effected. 
 
 The valley had now become so wholly 
 dark, that we could no longer discern each 
 other's faces, as we sat. There was a 
 melancholy in the voice of my instructor 
 that well accorded with the gloom around 
 us; and, saddened and subdued, I now 
 listened with resignation, if not with in- 
 terest, to those sublime, but, alas, I 
 thought, vain tenets, which, with the 
 warmth of a. believer, this Hierophant 
 expounded to me. 
 
 He spoke of the pre-existence of the 
 soul, — of its abode, from all eternity, in 
 a place of bliss, of which all that we have 
 most beautiful in our conceptions here is but 
 a dim transcript, a clouded remembrance. 
 In the blue depths of ether, he said, lay that 
 " Country of the Soul," — its boundary 
 alone visible in the line of milky light, that 
 separates it, as by a barrier of stars, from 
 the dark earth. " O, realm of purity ! 
 
 F 6
<#PG# 119>

 
 
 Home of the yet imfallen Spirit ! — where, 
 in the days of her primal innocence, she 
 wandered ; ere her beauty was soiled by 
 the touch of earth, or her resplendent wings 
 had yet withered away. Methinks," he 
 cried, " I see, at this moment, those fields of 
 radiance, — I look back, through the mists 
 of life, into that luminous world, where 
 the souls that have never lost their high, 
 heavenly rank, still soar, without a stain, 
 above the shadowless stars, and dwell to- 
 gether in infinite perfection and bliss ! " 
 
 As he spoke these words, a burst of 
 pure, brilliant light, like a sudden opening 
 of heaven, broke through the valley ; and, 
 as soon as my eyes were able to endure 
 the splendour, such a vision of loveliness 
 and glory opened upon them, as took 
 even my sceptical spirit by surprise, and 
 made it yield, at once, to the potency 
 of the spell. 
 
 Suspended, as I thought, in air, and 
 occupying the whole of the opposite region 
 of the valley, there appeared an immense
<#PG# 120>

 
 
 orb of liglit, within which, through a haze 
 of radiance, I could see distinctly groups 
 of young female spirits, who, in silent, but 
 harmonious movement, like that of the 
 stars, wound slowly through a variety of 
 fanciful evolutions ; and, as they linked 
 and unlinked each other's arms, formed 
 a living labyrinth of beauty and grace. 
 Though their feet seemed to tread along a 
 field of light, they had also wings, of the 
 richest hue, which, like rainbows over 
 waterfalls, when played with by the breeze, 
 at every moment reflected a new variety 
 of glory. 
 
 As I stood, gazing with wonder, the 
 orb, with all its ethereal inmates, gradually 
 receded into the dark void, lessenhig, as 
 it went, and growing more bright, as 
 it lessened; — till, at length, far off, like 
 a retiring comet, this little world of 
 Spirits, in one small point of intense ra- 
 diance, shone its last and vanished. "Go," 
 exclaimed the rapt Priest, " ye happy 
 souls, of whose dwelling a glimpse is thus
<#PG# 121>

 
 
 given to our eyes, go, wander, i;i your orb, 
 through the boundless heaven, nor ever 
 let a thought of this perishable world come 
 to mingle its dross with your divine nature, 
 or tempt you to that earthward fall, by 
 which spirits, no less bright, have been 
 ruined ! " 
 
 A pause ensued, during which, still 
 under the influence of wonder, I sent my 
 fancv wanderino; after the inhabitants of 
 that orb, — almost wishing myself cre- 
 dulous enough to believe in a heaven, of 
 which creatures, so like all that I most 
 loved on earth, were inmates. 
 
 At length, the Priest, with a sigh at the 
 contrast he was about to draw between 
 the happy spirits we had just seen and the 
 fallen ones of earth, resumed his melan- 
 choly History of the Soul. Tracing it, 
 from the first moment of earthward desire, 
 to its final eclipse in the shadows of this 
 world, he dwelt upon every stage of its 
 darkening descent, with a pathos that sent 
 sadness into tlie very depths of the heart.
<#PG# 122>

 
 
 The first downward look of the Spirit to- 
 wards earth — the tremble of her wings 
 on the edge of Heaven — the giddy slide, 
 at length, down that fatal descent, and the 
 Lethaean cup, midway in the sky, of which 
 when she has once tasted, Heaven is forgot, 
 — through all these gradations he mourn- 
 fully traced her fall, to the last stage of dark- 
 ness, when, wholly immersed in this world, 
 her celestial nature is changed, she can no 
 longer rise above earth, nor remembers 
 her home, but by glimpses so vague, that, 
 mistaking for hope what is only memory, 
 she believes them to be a light from the 
 Future, not the Past. 
 
 "To retrieve this ruin of the once blessed 
 Soul — to clear away, from around her, 
 the clouds of earth, and, restoring her lost 
 wines*, facilitate their return to Heaven 
 — such," said the reverend man, " is the 
 great task of our religion, and such the 
 
 * In the language of Plato, Hierocles, &c. to 
 " restore to the soul its wings," is the main object 
 both of religion and philosophy.
<#PG# 123>

 
 
 triumph of those divine Mysteries, in 
 which the life and essence of our reliffioii 
 lie. However sunk and changed and 
 clouded may be the Spirit, as long as a 
 single trace of her original light remains, 
 there is yet hope that " 
 
 Here his voice was interrupted by a 
 strain of mournful music, of which the 
 low, distant breathings had been, for some 
 minutes, heard, but which now gained 
 upon the ear too thrillingly to let it 
 listen to any more earthly sound. A 
 faint light, too, at that instant broke 
 through the valley, — and I could per- 
 ceive, not far from the sjiot where we 
 sat, a female figure, veiled, and crouching 
 to earth, as if subdued by sorrow, or under 
 the influence of shame. 
 
 The light, by which I saw her, was 
 from a pale, moon-like meteor, which had 
 formed itself in the air as the music ap- 
 proached, and shed over the rocks and the 
 lake a glinmier as cold as that by which 
 the Dead, in their own realm, gaze on each
<#PG# 124>

 
 
 Other. The music, too, which appeared 
 to rise directly out of the lake, and to come 
 full of the breath of its dark waters, spoke 
 a despondency in every note which no 
 language could express ; — and, as I lis- 
 tened to its tones, and looked upon that 
 fallen S})irit, (for such, the holy man 
 whispered, was the form before us,) so 
 entirely did the illusion of the scene take 
 possession of me, that, with breathless 
 anxiety I waited the result. 
 
 Nor had I gazed long before that 
 form rose slowly from its drooping posi- 
 tion ; — the air around it grew bright, and 
 the pale meteor overhead assumed a more 
 cheerful and living light. The veil, which 
 had before shrouded the face of the figure, 
 became gradually transparent, and the 
 features, one by one, disclosed themselves 
 through it. Having tremblingly watched 
 the progress of the apparition, I now 
 started from my seat, and half exclaimed, 
 " It is she ! " In another minute, this veil 
 had, like a thin mist, melted away, and
<#PG# 125>

 
 
 tlie young Priestess of the Moon stood, 
 for the third time, revealed before my 
 eyes ! 
 
 To rush instantly towards her was my 
 first impulse — but the arm of the Priest 
 held me firmly back. The fresh light, 
 which had begun to flow in from all sides, 
 collected itself in a glory round the spot 
 where she stood. Instead of melancholy 
 music, strains of the most exalted rapture 
 were heard ; and the young maiden, buoy- 
 ant as the inhabitants of the fairy orb, 
 amid a blaze of light like that which fell 
 upon her in the Temple, ascended into 
 the air. 
 
 " Stay, beautiful vision, stay ! " I ex- 
 claimed, as, breaking from the hold of the 
 Priest, I flung myself prostrate on the 
 ground, — the only mode by which I could 
 express the admiration, even to worship, 
 with which I was filled. But the vanishing 
 spirit heard me not : — receding into the 
 darkness, like that orb, whose track she 
 seemed to follow, her form lessened away.
<#PG# 126>

 
 
 till she was seen no more. Gazing, till 
 the last luminous speck had disappeared, 
 I suffered myself unconsciously to be led 
 away by my reverend guide, M'ho, placing 
 me once more on my bed of poppy-leaves, 
 left me to such repose as it was possible, 
 after such a scene, to enjoy.
<#PG# 127>

 
 
 CHAP. X. 
 
 The apparition with which I had been 
 blessed in that Valley of Visions — as the 
 place where I had witnessed these won- 
 ders was called — brought back to my 
 heart all the hopes and fancies, in which 
 during my descent from earth I had in- 
 dulfifed. I had now seen once more that 
 matchless creature, who had been my 
 guiding star into this mysterious world; 
 and that she was, in some way, connected 
 with the further revelations that awaited 
 me, I saw no reason to doubt. There 
 was a sublimity, too, in the doctrines of 
 my reverend teacher, and even a hope in 
 the promises of inmiortality held out by 
 him, which, in spite of reason, won insen- 
 sibly both upon my fancy and my pride. 
 
 The Future, however, was now but of 
 secondarv consideration ; — the Present,
<#PG# 128>

 
 
 and that deity of the Present, woman, were 
 the objects that engrossed my whole soul. 
 For the sake, indeed, of such beings alone 
 did I think immortality desirable, nor, 
 without them, would eternal life have ap- 
 peared to me worth a prayer. To every 
 further trial of my patience and faith, I 
 now made up my mind to submit without 
 a murmur. Some propitious chance, I 
 fondly persuaded myself, might yet bring 
 me nearer to the object of my adoration, 
 and enable me to address, as mortal wo- 
 man, her who had hitherto been to me but 
 as a vision, a shade. 
 
 The period of ni}'^ probation, however, 
 was nearly at an end. Both frame and 
 spirit had now been tried ; and, as the 
 crowning test of the purification of the 
 latter was that power of seeing into the 
 world of spirits, with which, in the Valley 
 of Visions, I had proved myself to be en- 
 dowed, there remained now, to perfect 
 my Initiation, but this one night more,
<#PG# 129>

 
 
 when, in the Temple of Isis, and in the 
 presence of her unveiled image, the last 
 grand revelation of the Secret of Secrets 
 was to open upon me. 
 
 I passed the morning of this day in 
 company with the same venerable person- 
 age, who had, from the first, presided 
 over the ceremonies of my instruction ; and 
 who, to inspire me with due reverence for 
 the power and magnificence of his religion, 
 now conducted me through the long range 
 of ilhuninated galleries and shrines, that 
 extend under the site upon which Mem- 
 phis and the Pyramids stand, and form 
 a counterpart under ground to that mighty 
 city of temples upon earth. 
 
 He then descended with me, still lower, 
 into those windiii^- crypts, where lay the 
 Seven Tables of stone, found by Hermes 
 in the valley of Hebron. " On these 
 tables," said he, " is written all the know- 
 ledge of the antediluvian race, — the 
 decrees of the stars from the beginning 
 of time, the annals of a still earlier world,
<#PG# 130>

 
 
 and all the marvellous secrets, both of 
 heaven and earth, which would have been 
 
 " but for this key, 
 Lost in the Universal Sea." 
 
 Returning to the region, from which we 
 had descended, we next visited, in succes- 
 sion, a series of small shrines, representing 
 the various objects of adoration through 
 Egypt, and thus furnishing to the Priest 
 an occasion for explaining the mysterious 
 nature of animal worship, and the re- 
 fined doctrines of theology that lay veiled 
 under its forms. Every shrine was con- 
 secrated to a particular faith, and con- 
 tained a living image of the deity which it 
 adored. Beside the goat of Mendes, with 
 his refulgent star upon his breast, I saw 
 the crocodile, as presented to the eyes of its 
 idolaters at Arsinoe, with costly gems in its 
 loathsome ears, and rich bracelets of gold 
 encircling its feet. Here, floating through 
 a tank in the centre of a temple, the sacred 
 carp of Lepidotum exhibited its silvery
<#PG# 131>

 
 
 scales ; while, there, the Isiac serpents 
 trailed languidly over the altar, with that 
 movement winch most inspires the hopes of 
 their votaries. In one of the small chapels 
 we found a beautiful child,' feedinj; and 
 watching over those golden beetles, which 
 are adored for their brightness, as emblems 
 of the sun ; while, in another, stood a 
 sacred ibis upon its pedestal, so like, in 
 plumage and attitude, to the bird of the 
 young Priestess, that I could gladly have 
 knelt down and worshipped it for her 
 sake. 
 
 After visiting these various shrines, and 
 listening to the reflections which they sug- 
 gested, I was next led by my guide to the 
 Great Hall of the Zodiac, on whose 
 ceiling, in bright and undying colours, 
 was delineated the map of the firmament, 
 as it appeared at the first dawn of time. 
 Here, in pointing out the track of the sun 
 among the spheres, he spoke eloquently of 
 the analogy that exists between moral and 
 physical darkness — of the sympathy with
<#PG# 132>

 
 
 which all spiritual creatures regard the 
 sun, so as to sadden and droop when he 
 sinks into his wintry hemisphere, and to 
 rejoice when he resumes his own em- 
 pire of light. Hence, the festivals and 
 hymns, with which most of the nations of 
 the earth are wont to welcome the resur- 
 rection of his orb in spring, as an emblem 
 and pledge of the re-ascent of the soul 
 to heaven. Hence, the songs of sorrow, 
 the mournful ceremonies, — like those 
 Mysteries of the Night, upon the Lake of 
 Sais, — in which they brood over his 
 autumnal descent into the shades, as a 
 type of the Spirit's fall into this world of 
 death. 
 
 In discourses such as these the hours 
 passed away ; and though there was no- 
 thing in the light of this sunless region to 
 mark to the eye the decline of day, my 
 own feelings told me that the night drew 
 near ; — nor, in spite of my incredulity, 
 could I refrain from a flutter of hope, as 
 
 G
<#PG# 133>

 
 
 that promised moment of revelation ap- 
 proached, when the Mystery of Mysteries 
 was to be made all my own. This con- 
 summation, however, was less near than I 
 expected. My patience had still further 
 trials to encounter. It was necessary, I 
 now found, that I should keep watch, dur- 
 ing the greater part of the night, in the 
 Sanctuary of the Temple, alone and in 
 darkness, — and thus prepare myself, by 
 meditation, for the awful moment, when 
 the irradiation from behind the sacred 
 Veils was to burst upon me. 
 
 At the appointed hour, we left the Hall 
 of the Zodiac, and proceeded through 
 a line of long marble galleries, where the 
 lamps were more thinly scattered as we ad- 
 vanced, till, at length, we found ourselves 
 in total darkness. Here the Priest, taking 
 me by the hand, and leading me down a 
 flight of steps, into a place where the same 
 deep gloom prevailed, said, with a voice 
 trembling, as if from excess of awe, — 
 " Thou art now in the Sanctuary of our
<#PG# 134>

 
 
 goddess, Isis, and the dark veils, that hang 
 over her image, are before thee!" 
 
 After exhorting me earnestly to that 
 train of thought, which best accorded with 
 the spirit of the place where I stood, and, 
 above all, to that full and unhesitating 
 faith, with which alone, he said, the mani- 
 festation of such mysteries should be ap- 
 proached, the holy man took leave of me, 
 and re-ascended the steps ; — while, so 
 spell-bound did I feel by that deep dark- 
 ness, that the last sound of his footsteps 
 died upon my ear, before I ventured to 
 stir a limb from the position in which he 
 had left me. 
 
 The prospect of the long watch, now 
 before me, was dreadful. Even danger 
 itself, in an active form, would have been 
 preferable to this sort of safe, but dull, 
 probation, by which patience was the 
 only virtue put to the proof. Having 
 ascertained how far the space around me 
 was free from obstacles, I endeavoured 
 G 2
<#PG# 135>

 
 
 to beguile the time by pacing up and 
 down within those limits, till I became 
 tired of the echoes of my own tread. 
 Finding my way, then, to what I felt to 
 be a massive pillar, and, leaning wearily 
 against it, I surrendered myself to a train 
 of thoughts and feelings, far different 
 from those with which the Hierophant 
 had hoped to inspire me. 
 
 " Why," I again asked, " if these 
 priests possess the secret of life, why are 
 they themselves the victims of death ? 
 why sink into the grave with the cup of 
 immortality in their hands ? But no, safe 
 boasters, the eternity they so lavishly pro- 
 mise is reserved for another, a future 
 world — that ready resource of all priestly 
 promises — that depository of the airy 
 pledges of all creeds. Another world ! — 
 alas, where does it lie? or, what spirit 
 hath ever come to say that Life is there?" 
 
 The conclusion, to which, half sadly, 
 half passionately, I arrived, was that, 
 life being but a dream of the monient.
<#PG# 136>

 
 
 never to come again, every bliss that is 
 promised for hereafter should be secured 
 by the wise man here. And, as no 
 heaven I had ever heard of from these 
 visionary priests opened half such cer- 
 tainty of happiness as that smile which I 
 beheld last night, — " Let me," I ex- 
 claimed, impatiently, striking the massy 
 pillar, till it rung, " let me but make that 
 beautiful Priestess my own, and I here 
 willingly exchange for her every chance 
 of immortality, that the combined wis- 
 dom of Egypt's Twelve Temples can 
 offer me ! " 
 
 No sooner had I uttered these words, 
 than a tremendous peal, like that of 
 thunder, rolled over the Sanctuary, and 
 seemed to shake its walls. On every 
 side, too, a succession of blue, vivid 
 flashes pierced, like so many lances of 
 light, through the gloom, revealing to 
 me, at intervals, the mighty dome in 
 which I stood — its ceiling of azure, stud- 
 ded with stars, — its colossal columns, 
 
 G 3
<#PG# 137>

 
 
 towering aloft, and those dark, mysterious 
 veils, which hung, in massy drapery, from 
 the roof to the floor, and covered the rich 
 glories of the Shrine under their folds. 
 
 So weary had I grown of my tedious 
 watch, that this stormy and fitful illumin- 
 ation, during which the Sanctuary seemed 
 to rock to its base, was by no means an 
 unwelcome interruption of the monotony 
 under which my impatience suffered. 
 After a short interval, however, the flashes 
 ceased ; — the sounds died away, like ex- 
 hausted thunder, through the abyss, and 
 darkness and silence, like that of the 
 grave, succeeded. 
 
 Resting my back once more against 
 the pillar, and fixing my eyes upon that 
 side of the Sanctuary, from which the 
 promised irradiation was to burst, I now 
 resolved to await the awful moment in 
 patience. Resigned and immovable, I 
 had remained thus, for nearly another 
 hour, when, suddenly, along the edges 
 of the mighty Veils, I perceived a thin
<#PG# 138>

 
 
 rim of light, as if from some brilliant 
 object under them ; — like that border 
 which encircles a cloud at sunset, when 
 the radiance from behind is escaping at 
 its edges. 
 
 This indication of concealed glories 
 grew every instant more strong; till, at 
 last, vividly marked as it was upon the 
 darkness, the narrow fringe of lustre al- 
 most pained the eye, giving promise of a 
 splendour too bright to be endured. My 
 expectations were now wound to the high- 
 est pitch, and all the scepticism, into 
 which I had been cooling down my mind, 
 was forgotten. The wonders that had 
 been presented to me since my descent 
 from earth — that glimpse into Elysium 
 on the first night of my coming — those 
 visitants from the Land of Spirits in the 
 mysterious valley, — all led me to expect, 
 in this last and brightest revelation, such 
 visions of glory and knowledge as might 
 transcend even fancy itself, nor leave
<#PG# 139>

 
 
 a doubt that they belonged less to earth 
 than heaven. 
 
 While, with an imagination thus excited, 
 I stood waiting the result, an increased 
 gush of light still more awakened my at- 
 tention ; and I saw, with an intenseness of 
 interest, which made my heart beat aloud, 
 one of the corners of the mighty Veil 
 slowly raised up. I now felt that the Great 
 Secret — whatever it might be — was at 
 hand. A vague hope even crossed my mind 
 — so wholly had imagination resumed her 
 empire — that the splendid promise of 
 my dream was on the point of being 
 realised ! 
 
 With surprise, however, and — for a 
 moment — with disappointment, I per- 
 ceived, that the massy corner of the Veil 
 was but raised sufficiently to allow a female 
 figure to emerge from Under it, — and 
 then fell agaui, over its mystic splendours, 
 as dark as before. By the strong light, 
 too, that issued when the drapery was 
 lifted, and illuminated the profile of the
<#PG# 140>

 
 
 emerging figure, I either saw, or fancied 
 that I saw, the same bright features, that 
 had ah-eady mocked me so often with their 
 momentary charm, and seemed destined 
 to haunt my imagination as unavailingly as 
 the fond, vain dream of Immortality itself. 
 
 Dazzled as I had been by that short 
 gush of splendour, and distrusting even my 
 senses, when under the influence of a 
 fancy so excited, I had hardly time to 
 question myself as to the reality of my 
 impression, when I heard the sounds of 
 light footsteps approaching me through 
 the ffloom. In a second or two more, the 
 figure stopped before me, and, placing the 
 end of a riband gently in my hand, said, 
 in a tremulous whisper, " Follow, and be 
 silent." 
 
 So sudden and strange was the adven- 
 ture, that, for a moment, I hesitated, — fear- 
 ful lest my eyes should have been deceived 
 as to the object they had seen. Casting a 
 look towards the Veil, which seemed burst- 
 ing with its luminous secret, I was almost 
 a 5
<#PG# 141>

 
 
 doubting to which of the two chances 
 I should commit myself, when I felt the 
 riband in my hand pulled softly at the 
 other extremity. This movement, at 
 once, like a touch of magic, decided 
 me. Without further deliberation, I 
 yielded to the silent summons, and fol- 
 lowing my guide, who was already at 
 some distance before me, found myself 
 led up the same flight of marble steps, 
 by which the Priest had conducted me 
 into the Sanctuary. Arrived at their 
 summit, I felt the pace of my conductress 
 quicken, and, giving one more look to 
 the Veiled Shrine, whose glories we left 
 burning ineffectually behind us, hastened 
 into the gloom, full of confidence in the 
 belief, that she, who now held the other 
 end of that clue, was one whom I could 
 follow devotedly through the world.
<#PG# 142>

 
 
 CHAP. XL 
 
 So rapidly was I hurried along by my 
 unseen conductress, full of wonder at the 
 speed with which she ventured through 
 these labyrinths, that I had but little time 
 to reflect upon the strangeness of the 
 adventure to which I had committed my- 
 self. My knowledge of the character of 
 the priests, as well as the fearful rumours 
 that had reached me, of the fate that often 
 attended unbelievers in their hands, waked 
 a momentary suspicion of treachery in my 
 mind. But, when I recalled the face of 
 my guide, as I had seen it in the chapel, 
 with that divine look, the very memory 
 of which brought purity into the heart, 
 this suspicion all vanished, and I felt 
 shame at having harboured it but an in- 
 stant. 
 
 In the mean while, our course continued 
 uninterrupted, through windings more 
 G 6
<#PG# 143>

 
 
 capriciously intricate than any that I had 
 yet passed, and whose darkness seemed 
 never to have been disturbed by a single 
 glimmer. My conductress still continued 
 at some distance before me, and the clue, 
 to which I clung as if it were the thread 
 of Destiny itself, was still kept, by her 
 speed, at full stretch between us. At 
 length, suddenly stopping, she said, in a 
 breathless whisper, " Seat thyself here," 
 and, at the same moment, led me by the 
 hand to a sort of low car, in which I lost 
 not a moment in placing myself, as desired, 
 while the maiden, as promptly, took her 
 seat by my side. 
 
 A sudden click, like the touching of 
 a spring, was then heard, and the car, — 
 which, as I had felt in entering it, leaned 
 half-way over a steep descent, — on being 
 loosed from its station, shot down, al- 
 most perpendicularly, into the darkness, 
 with a rapidity which, at first, nearly 
 deprived me of breath. The wheels slid 
 smoothly and noiselessly in grooves, and
<#PG# 144>

 
 
 the impetus, which the car acquired in 
 descending, was sufficient, I perceived, to 
 carry it up an eminence that succeeded, 
 — from the summit of which it again 
 rushed down another declivity, even still 
 more long and precipitous than the for- 
 mer. In this manner we proceeded, by 
 alternate falls and rises, till, at length, 
 from the last and steepest elevation, the 
 car descended upon a level of deep sand, 
 where, after running for a few yards, it 
 by degrees lost its motion and stopped. 
 
 Here, the maiden alighting, again placed 
 the riband in my hands, — and again I 
 followed her, though with more slowness 
 and difficulty than before, as our way now 
 led up a flight of damp and time-worn 
 steps, whose ascent seemed to the weary 
 and insecure foot interminable. Perceiv- 
 ing with what languor my guide ad- 
 vanced, I was on the point of making 
 an effiart to assist her progress, when 
 the creak of an opening door above, 
 and a faint gleam of light which, at the
<#PG# 145>

 
 
 same moment, shone upon her figure, 
 apprised me tliat we were arrived within 
 reach of sunshine. 
 
 Joyfully I followed through this open- 
 ing, and, by the dim light, could discern, 
 that we were now in the sanctuary of a 
 vast, ruined temple, — having entered by 
 a passage under the lofty pedestal, upon 
 which an image of the idol of the place 
 once stood. The first movement of the 
 maiden, after replacing the portal under 
 the pedestal, was, without even a single look 
 towards me, to cast herself down on her 
 knees, with her hands clasped and up- 
 lifted, as if for the purpose of thanks^giv- 
 ing or prayer. But she was unable to 
 sustain herself in this position ; — her 
 strength could hold out no longer. Over- 
 come by agitation and fatigue, she sunk 
 senseless upon the pavement. 
 
 Bewildered as I was, myself, by the 
 events of the night, I stood for some 
 minutes looking upon her in a state of 
 helplessness and alarm. But, reminded.
<#PG# 146>

 
 
 by my own feverish sensations, of the 
 reviving effects of the air, I raised her 
 gently in my arms, and crossing the corri- 
 dor that smn-ounded the sanctuary, found 
 my way to the outer vestibule of the tem- 
 ple. Here, shading her eyes from the sun, 
 I placed her, reclining, upon the steps, 
 where the cool wind, then blowing freshly 
 from the north, might play, with free 
 draught, between the pillars over her brow. 
 
 It was, indeed, — as I now saw, with 
 certainty, — the same beautiful and myste- 
 rious girl, who had been the cause of my 
 descent into that subterranean world, and 
 who now, under such strange and unac- 
 countable circumstances, was my guide 
 back again to the realms of day. I looked 
 round, to discover where we were, and 
 beheld such a scene of grandeur, as, — 
 could my eyes then have wandered to any 
 other object from the pale form reclining at 
 my side — might well have won them to 
 dwell on its splendid beauties. 
 
 I was now standing, I found, on the
<#PG# 147>

 
 
 small island in the centre of Lake Moeris ; 
 and that sanctuary, where we had emei-ged 
 from darkness, formed part of the ruins of 
 a temple, which (as I have since learned) 
 was, in the grander days of Memphis, a 
 place of pilgrimage for worshippers from 
 all parts of Egypt. The fair Lake, itself, 
 out of whose waters once rose pavilions, 
 palaces, and even lofty pyramids, was still, 
 though divested of many of these wonders, 
 a scene of interest and splendour such as 
 the whole world could not equal. While 
 the shores still sparkled with mansions 
 and temples, that bore testimony to the 
 luxury of a living race, the voice of the 
 Past, speaking out of unnumbered ruins, 
 whose summits, here and there, rose 
 blackly above the wave, told of times long 
 fled and generations long swept away,' 
 before whose giant remains all the glory 
 of the present stood humbled. Over the 
 southern bank of the Lake hung the dark 
 relics of the Labyrinth ; — its twelve 
 Royal Palaces, like the mansions of the
<#PG# 148>

 
 
 Zodiac, — its thundering portals and con- 
 stellated halls, having left nothing behind 
 but a few frowning ruins, which, contrasted 
 with the soft groves of olive and acacia 
 ai'ound them, seemed to rebuke the lux- 
 uriant smiles of nature, and threw a me- 
 lancholy grandeur over the whole scene. 
 
 The effects of the air, in re-animating 
 the young Priestess, were less speedy 
 than I had expected ; — her eyes were 
 still closed, and she remained pale and 
 insensible. Alarmed, I now rested her 
 head (which had been, for some time, 
 supported by my arm,) against the base 
 of a column, with my cloak for its 
 pillow, while I hastened to procure some 
 water from the Lake. The temple stood 
 high, and the descent to the shore was 
 precipitous. But, my Epicurean habits 
 having but little impaired my activity, 
 I soon descended, with the lightness of 
 a desert deer, to the bottom. Here, 
 plucking from a lofty bean-tree, whose 
 flowers stood, shining like gold, above the
<#PG# 149>

 
 
 water, one of those large hollowed leaves 
 that serve as cups for the Hebes of the 
 Nile, I filled it from the Lake, and hurried 
 back with the cool draught to the temple. 
 It was not without some difficulty and 
 delay that I succeeded, in bearing my 
 rustic chalice steadily up the steep ; more 
 than once did an unlucky slip waste its 
 contents, and as often did I impatiently 
 return to refill it. 
 
 During this time, the young maiden 
 was fast recovering her animation and 
 consciousness ; and, at the moment when 
 I appeared above the edge of the steep, 
 was just rising from the steps, with her 
 hand pressed to her forehead, as if con- 
 fusedly recalling the recollection of what 
 had occurred. No sooner did she observe 
 me, than a short cry of alarm broke from 
 her lips. Looking anxiously round, as 
 though she sought for protection, and half 
 audibly uttering the words, " Where is 
 he ? " she made an effort, as I approached, 
 to retreat into the temple.
<#PG# 150>

 
 
 Already, however, I was by her side, 
 and taking her hand gently, as she turned 
 away, " Whom dost thou seek, fair 
 Priestess ? " I asked, — for the first time 
 breaking through the silence she had en- 
 joined, and in a tone that might have 
 re-assured the most timid spirit. But 
 my words had no effect in calming her 
 apprehension. Trembling, and with her 
 eyes still averted towards the Temple, 
 she continued in a voice of suppressed 
 alarm, — " Where ca7i he be ? — that 
 venerable Athenian, that philosopher, 
 who " 
 
 " Here, here," I exclaimed, anxiously 
 interrupting her, — " behold him still by 
 thy side — the same, the very same, who 
 saw thee steal from under the Veils of 
 the Sanctuary, whom thou hast guided by 
 a clue through those labyrinths below, and 
 who now but waits his command from 
 those lips, to devote himself through life 
 and death to thy service." As I spoke 
 these words, she turned slowly round, and
<#PG# 151>

 
 
 looking timidly in my face, while her own 
 burned with blushes, said, in a tone of 
 doubt and wonder, " Thou ! " and hid 
 her eyes in her hands. 
 
 I knew not how to interpret a reception 
 so unexpected. That some mistake or 
 disappointment had occurred was evident ; 
 but so inexplicable did the whole adven- 
 ture appear, that it was in vain to think 
 of unravelling any part of it. Weak and 
 agitated, she now tottered to the steps 
 of the temple, and there seating herself, 
 with her forehead against the cold marble, 
 seemed for some moments absorbed in the 
 most anxious thought, — while silent and 
 watchful I waited her decision, with a 
 prophetic feeling, however, within, which 
 loudly whispered that my destiny would 
 be hencefoi'th linked with hers. 
 
 The inward struggle by which she 
 was agitated, though violent, was not 
 of long continuance. Starting suddenly 
 from her seat, with a look of terror 
 towards the temple, as if the fear of
<#PG# 152>

 
 
 immediate pursuit had alone decided her, 
 she pointed eagerly towards the East, and 
 exclaimed, " To the Nile, without delay ! " 
 — clasping her hands, when she had 
 spoken, with the most suppliant fervour, 
 as if to soften the abruptness of the man- 
 date she had given, and appealing to me 
 with a look that would have taught Stoics 
 tenderness. 
 
 I lost no time in obeying the welcome 
 command. While a thousand wild hopes 
 and wishes crowded upon my fancy, at 
 the prospect which a voyage, under such 
 auspices, presented, I descended rapidly 
 to the shore, and hailing one of the nu- 
 merous boats that ply upon the Lake for 
 hire, arranged speedily for a passage down 
 the canal to the Nile. Having learned, 
 too, from the boatmen, a more easy path 
 up the rock, I hastened back to the 
 Temple for my fair charge ; and without 
 a word, a look, that could alarm, even 
 by its kindness, or disturb that innocent 
 confidence which she now evidently
<#PG# 153>

 
 
 placed in me, led her down by the wind- 
 ing padi to the boat. 
 
 Every thing looked smiling around us 
 as we embarked. The morning was now 
 in its first freshness, and the path of the 
 breeze might be traced over the Lake, 
 wakening up its waters from their sleep of 
 the night. The gay, golden-winged birds 
 that haunt these shores, were, in every 
 direction, skimming along the Lake; while, 
 with a graver consciousness of beauty, 
 the swan and the pelican were seen dress- 
 ing their white plumage in the mirror of 
 its wave. To add to the animation of the 
 scene, there came, at intervals, on the 
 breeze, a sweet tinkling of musical instru- 
 ments from boats at a distance, employed 
 thus early in pursuing the fish of these 
 waters, that suffer themselves to be de- 
 coyed into the nets by music. 
 
 The vessel which I selected for our 
 voyage was one of those small pleasure- 
 boats or yachts, — so much in use among 
 the luxurious navigators of the Nile, —
<#PG# 154>

 
 
 in the centre of which rises a pavilion of 
 cedar or cypress wood, gilded gorgeously, 
 on the outside, with religious emblems, 
 and fitted up, within, for feasting and 
 repose. To the door of this pavilion I 
 now led my companion, and, after a few 
 words of kindness — tempered with as 
 much respectful reserve as the deep ten- 
 derness which I felt would admit of — left 
 her in solitude to court that restoring rest, 
 which the agitation of her spirits but too 
 much required. 
 
 For myself, though repose was hardly 
 less necessary to me, the ferment in which 
 my thoughts had been kept seemed to 
 render it hopeless. Throwing myself 
 upon the deck, under an awning which 
 the sailors had raised for me, I con- 
 tinued, for some hours, in a sort of vague 
 day-dream, — sometimes passing in review 
 the scenes of that subterranean drama, 
 and sometimes, with my eyes fixed in 
 drowsy vacancy, receiving passively the
<#PG# 155>

 
 
 impressions of the bright scenery through 
 which we passed. 
 
 The banks of the canal were then luxu- 
 riantly wooded. Under the tufts of the 
 light and towering palm were seen the 
 orange and the citron, interlacing their 
 boughs ; while, here and there, huge ta- 
 marisks thickened the shade, and, at the 
 very edge of the bank, the willow of Ba- 
 bylon stood bending its graceful branches 
 into the water. Occasionally, out of the 
 depth of these groves, there shone a small 
 temple or pleasure-house ; — while, now 
 and then, an opening in their line of foliage 
 allowed the eye to wander over extensive 
 fields, all covered with beds of those pale, 
 sweet roses, for which this district of 
 Egypt is so celebrated. 
 
 The activity of the morning hour was 
 visible every where. Flights of doves 
 and lapwings were fluttering among the 
 leaves, and the white heron, which had been 
 roostinff all niffht in some date-tree, now
<#PG# 156>

 
 
 Stood sunning its wings upon the green 
 bank, or floated, like living silver, over 
 the flood. The flowers, too, both of 
 land and water, looked freshly awakened ; 
 — and, most of all, the superb lotus, which 
 had risen with the sun from the wave, and 
 was now holding up her chalice for a full 
 draught of his liffht. 
 
 Such were the scenes that now passed 
 before my eyes, and mingled with the 
 reveries that floated through my mind, as 
 our boat, with its high, capacious sail, 
 swept over the flood. Though the occur- 
 rences of the last few days appeared to 
 me one series of wonders, yet by far the 
 most miraculous wonder of all was, that 
 she, whose first look had S'ent wild-fire 
 into my heart, — whom I had thought of 
 ever since with a restlessness of passion, 
 that would have dared any thing on earth 
 to obtain its object, — was now sleeping 
 sacredly in that small pavilion, while 
 guarding her, even from myself, I lay 
 calmly at its threshold. 
 
 H
<#PG# 157>

 
 
 Meanwhile, the sun had reached his 
 meridian. The busy hum of the morning 
 had died gradually away, and all around 
 was sleeping in the hot stillness of noon. 
 The Nile-goose, folding her splendid 
 wings, was lying motionlcoS on the shadow 
 of the sycamores in the water. Even the 
 nimble lizards upon the bank seemed to 
 move more languidly, as the light fell 
 upon their gold and azure hues. Over- 
 come as I was with watching, and weary 
 with thought, it was not long before I 
 yielded to the becalming influence of the 
 hour. Looking fixedly at the pavilion, — 
 as if once more to assure my senses, that 
 I was not already in a dream, but that the 
 young Egyptian was really there, — I felt 
 my eyes close as I looked, and in a few 
 minutes sunk into a profound sleep.
<#PG# 158>

 
 
 CHAP. XII. 
 
 I was by the canal through which we 
 now sailed, that, in the more prosperous 
 days of Memphis, the commerce of Upper 
 Egypt and Nubia was transported to her 
 magnificent Lake, and from thence, having 
 paid tribute to the queen of cities, was 
 poured out again, through the Nile, into 
 the ocean. The course of this canal to 
 the river was not direct, but ascending in a 
 south-easterly direction towards the Said ; 
 and in calms, or with adverse winds, the 
 passage was tedious. But as the breeze 
 was now blowing freshly from the north, 
 there was every prospect of our reaching 
 the river before night-fall. Rapidly, too, 
 as our galley swept along the flood, its 
 motion was so smooth as to be hardly 
 felt; and the quiet gurgle of the waters 
 
 H 2
<#PG# 159>

 
 
 underneath, and the drowsv sonij of the 
 boatman at the prow, alone disturbed the 
 deep silence that prevailed. 
 
 The sun, indeed, had nearly sunk be- 
 hind the Libyan hills, before the sleep, in 
 which these sounds tended to lull me, was 
 broken ; and the first object, on which my 
 eyes rested, in waking, was that fair young 
 Priestess, — seated under a porch by which 
 the door of the pavilion was shaded, and 
 bending intently over a small volume that 
 lay unrolled on her lap. 
 
 Her face was but half turned towards 
 me ; and as, once or twice, she raised her 
 eyes to the warm sky, whose light fell, 
 softened through the trellis, over her 
 cheek, I found all that feeling of reverence, 
 with which she had inspired me in the 
 chapel, return. There was even a purer 
 and holier charm around her countenance, 
 thus seen by the natural light of day, 
 than in those dim and unhallowed regions 
 below. She could now, too, look direct to
<#PG# 160>

 
 
 the glorious sky, and behold that heaven 
 which was alone worthy to meet such eyes. 
 
 After contemplating her for a few mo- 
 ments, with little less than adoration, I 
 rose gently from my resting-place, and 
 approached the pavilion. But the mere 
 movement had startled her from her de- 
 votion, and, blushing and confused, she 
 covered the volume with the folds of her 
 robe. 
 
 In the art of winning upon female 
 confidence I had, of course, long been 
 schooled ; and, now that to the lessons of 
 gallantry the inspiration of love was added, 
 my ambition to please and to interest could 
 hardly, it may be supposed, fail of success. 
 I soon found, however, how much less fluent 
 is the heart than the fancy, and how very 
 distinct are the operations of making love 
 and feeling it. In the few words of greet- 
 ing now exchanged between us, it was 
 evident that the gay, the enterprising Epi- 
 curean was little less embarrassed than the 
 secluded Priestess ; — and, after one or 
 
 H 3
<#PG# 161>

 
 
 two ineffectual efforts to briiiff our voices 
 acquainted with each other, the eyes of 
 both turned bashfully away, and we re- 
 lapsed into silence. 
 
 From this situation — the result of 
 timidity on one side, and of a feeling alto- 
 gether new, on the other — we were, at 
 length, after an interval of estrangement, 
 reUeved, by the boatmen announcing that 
 the Nile was in sight. The countenance 
 of the young Egyptian brightened at this 
 intelligence ; and the smile with which I 
 congratulated her on the speed of our 
 voyage was answered by one from her, so 
 full of gratitude, that already an instinctive 
 sympathy seemed established between us. 
 
 We were now on the point of entering 
 that sacred river, of whose sweet waters 
 the exile drinks in his dreams, and for a 
 draught of whose flood the daughters of 
 the Ptolemies, when far away, on foreign 
 thrones, have sighed amidst their splen- 
 dour. As our boat, with slackened sail, 
 glided into the current, an enquiry from
<#PG# 162>

 
 
 the boatmen, whether they should anchor 
 for the night in the Nile, first reminded 
 me of the ignorance in which I still re- 
 mained, with respect to either the motive 
 or destination of our voyage. Embarrassed 
 by their question, I directed my eyes 
 towards the Priestess, whom I saw wait- 
 ing for my answer with a look of anxiety, 
 which this silent reference to her wishes 
 at once dispelled. Eagerly unfolding the 
 volume with which I had seen her occu- 
 pied, she took from its folds a small leaf 
 of papyrus, on which there appeared to 
 be some faint lines of drawing, and after 
 looking upon it though tfiiUy, for a moment, 
 herself, placed it, with an agitated hand, 
 in mine. 
 
 In the mean time, the boatmen had 
 taken in their sail, and the yacht drove 
 slowly down the river with the current, 
 while, by a light which had been kindled 
 at sunset on the deck, I stood examining 
 the leaf that the Priestess had given me, — 
 her dark eyes fixed anxiously on my 
 
 H 4
<#PG# 163>

 
 
 countenance all the while. The lines 
 traced upon the papyrus were so faint as 
 to be almost invisible, and I was for some 
 time at a loss to divine their import. At 
 length, I could perceive that they were 
 the outlines, or map — traced slightly and 
 unsteadily with a Memphian reed — of a 
 part of that mountainous ridge by which 
 Upper Egypt is bounded to the east, to- 
 gether with the names, or rather emblems, 
 of the chief towns in the neighbourhood. 
 
 It was thither, I could not doubt, that 
 the young Priestess wished to pursue her 
 course. Without a moment's delay, there- 
 fore, I gave orders to the boatmen to set 
 our yacht before the wind, and ascend the 
 current. My command was promptly 
 obeyed : the white sail again rose into the 
 region of the breeze, and the satisfaction 
 that beamed in every feature of the fair 
 Egyptian showed that the quickness with 
 which I had obeyed her wishes was not 
 unfelt by her. The moon had now risen ; 
 and thouiih the current was agamst us, the
<#PG# 164>

 
 
 Etesian wind of the season blew strongly 
 up the river, and we were soon floating 
 before it, through the rich plains and 
 groves of the Said. 
 
 The love with which this simple girl 
 had inspired me, was — possibly from the 
 mystic scenes and situations in which I 
 had seen her — not unmingled with a tinge 
 of superstitious awe, under the influence 
 of which I felt the buoyancy of my spirit 
 checked. The few words that had passed 
 between us on the subject of our route 
 had somewhat loosened this spell; and 
 what I wanted of vivacity and confidence 
 was more tlian compensated by the tone of 
 deep sensibility which love had awakened 
 in their place. 
 
 We had not proceeded far before the 
 glittering of lights at a distance, and the 
 shooting up of fireworks, at intervals, into 
 the air, apprised us that we were approach- 
 ing one of those night-fairs, or marts, 
 which it is the custom, at this season, to 
 hold upon the Nile. To me the scene 
 H 5
<#PG# 165>

 
 
 was familiar ; but to my young companion 
 it was evidently a new world ; and the 
 mixture of alarm and delijjht with which 
 she gazed, from under her veil, upon the 
 busy §cene into which we now sailed, gave 
 an air of innocence to her beauty, which 
 still more heightened its every charm. 
 
 It was one of the widest parts of the 
 river; and the whole surface, from one 
 bank to the other, was covered with boats. 
 Along the banks of a green island, in the 
 middle of the stream, lay anchored the 
 galleys of the principal traders, — large 
 floating bazars, bearing each the name of 
 its owner, emblazoned in letters of flame, 
 upon the stern. Over their decks were 
 spread out, in gay confusion, the products 
 of the loom and needle of Egypt, — rich 
 carpets of Memphis, and those variegated 
 veils, for which the female embroiderers of 
 the Nile are so celebrated, and to which 
 the name of Cleopatra lends a traditional 
 charm. In each of the other galleys was 
 exhibited some branch of Egyptian work-
<#PG# 166>

 
 
 manship — vases of the fragrant porcelain 
 of On, — cups of that frail crystal, whose 
 hues change like those of the pigeon's 
 plumage, — enamelled amulets graven with 
 the head of Anubis, and necklaces and 
 bracelets of the black beans of Abyssinia. 
 
 While Commerce thus displayed her 
 luxuries in one quarter, in every other 
 direction Pleasure, multiplied into her 
 thousand shapes, swarmed over the waters. 
 Nor was the festivity confined to the river 
 only. All along the banks of the island 
 and on the shores, lighted up mansions 
 were seen through the trees, from which 
 sounds of music and merriment came. In 
 some of the boats were bands of minstrels, 
 who, from time to time, answered each 
 other, like echoes, across the wave ; and 
 the notes of the lyre, the flageolet, and 
 the swe^t lotus-wood flute, were heard, 
 in the pauses of revelry, dying along the 
 waters. 
 
 Meanwhile, from other boats stationed 
 in the least lighted places, the workers of 
 H 6
<#PG# 167>

 
 
 fire sent forth their wonders into the air. 
 Bursting out from time to time, as if in 
 the very exuberance of joy, these sallies of 
 flame seemed to reach the sky, and there 
 breaking into a shower of sparkles, shed 
 such a splendour round, as brightened 
 even the white Arabian hills, — makine 
 them shine like the brow of Mount Atlas 
 at night, when the fire from his own 
 bosom is playing around its snows. 
 
 The opportunity which this luxurious 
 mart afforded us, of providing ourselves 
 with other and less remarkable habiliments 
 than those in which we had escaped from 
 that nether world, was too seasonable not 
 to be gladly taken advantage of by both. 
 For myself, the strange mystic garb which 
 I wore was sufficiently concealed by my 
 Grecian mantle, which I had luckily 
 thrown round me on the night of my 
 watch. But the thin veil of my com- 
 panion was a far less efficient disguise. 
 She had, indeed, flung away the golden 
 beetles from her hair: but the sacred
<#PG# 168>

 
 
 robe of her order was still too visible, 
 and the stars of the bandelet shone 
 brightly through her veil. 
 
 Most gladly, therefore, did she avail 
 herself of this opportunity of a change ; 
 and, as she took from a casket — which, 
 with the volume I had seen her reading, 
 appeared to be her only treasure — a 
 small jewel, to exchange for the simple 
 garments she had chosen, there fell out, 
 at the same time, the very cross of silver, 
 which I had seen her kiss, as may be 
 remembered, in the monumental chapel, 
 and which was afterwards pressed to my 
 own lips. This link (for such it appeared 
 to my imagination) between us, now re- 
 vived in my heart all the burning feelings 
 of that moment ; — and, had I not abrupdy 
 turned away, my agitation would, but too 
 plainly, have betrayed itself. 
 
 The object, for which we had delayed 
 in this gay scene, being accomplished, the 
 sail was again spread, and we proceeded 
 on our course up the river. The sounds
<#PG# 169>

 
 
 and the lights we left behind died gra- 
 dually away, and we now floated along in 
 moonlight and silence once more. Sweet 
 dews, worthy of being called " the tears 
 of Isis," fell through the air, and every 
 plant and flower sent its fragrance to meet 
 them. The wind, just srtong enough to 
 bear us smoothly against the current, 
 scarcely stirred the shadow of the tama- 
 risks on the water. As the inhabitants 
 from all quarters were collected at the 
 night-fair, the Nile was more than usually 
 still and solitary. Such a silence, indeed, 
 prevailed, that, as we glided near the 
 shore, we could hear the rustling of the 
 acacias, as the chameleons ran up their 
 stems. It was, altogether, a night such 
 as only the clime of Egypt can boast, 
 when every thing lies lulled in that sort of 
 bright tranquillity, which, we may ima- 
 gine, shines over the sleep of those happy 
 spirits, who are supposed to rest in the 
 Valley of the Moon, on their way to 
 heaven.
<#PG# 170>

 
 
 By such a light, and at such an hour, 
 seated, side by side, on the deck of that 
 bark, did we pursue our course up the 
 lonely Nile — each a mystery to the 
 other — our thoughts, our objects, our 
 very names a secret ; — separated, too, 
 till now, by destinies so different ; the one, 
 a gay voluptuary of the Garden of Athens, 
 the other, a secluded Priestess of the 
 Temples of Memphis; — and the only 
 relation yet established between us being 
 that dangerous one of love, passionate 
 love, on one side, and the most feminine 
 and confiding dependence on the other. 
 
 The passing adventure of the night- 
 fair had not only dispelled still more our 
 mutual reserve, but had supplied us with 
 a subject on which we could converse 
 without embarrassment. From this topic 
 I took care to lead on, without interrup- 
 tion, to others, — fearful lest our former 
 silence should return, and the music of 
 her voice again be lost to me. It was, in- 
 deed, only by thus indirectly unburdening
<#PG# 171>

 
 
 my heart that I was enabled to refrain 
 from the full utterance of all I thought 
 and felt ; and the restless rapidity with 
 which I flew from subject to subject was 
 but an effort to escape from the only one 
 in which my heart was interested. 
 
 " How bright and happy," said I, — 
 pointing up to Sothis, the fair Star of the 
 Waters, which was just then sparkling 
 brilliantly over our heads, — " How bright 
 and happy this world ought to be, if — 
 as your Egyptian sages assert — yon pure 
 and beautiful luminary was its birth-star !" 
 Then, still leaning back, and letting my 
 eyes wander over the firmament, as if 
 seekine; to disengage them from the 
 fascination which they dreaded — " To 
 the study (said I), for ages, of skies like 
 this, may the pensive and mystic character 
 of your nation be traced. That mixture 
 of pride and melancholy which naturally 
 arises, at the sight of those eternal lights 
 shining out of darkness ; — that sublime, 
 but saddened, anticipation of a Future,
<#PG# 172>

 
 
 which comes over the soul in the silence 
 of such an hour, when, though Death 
 seems to . reign in the repose of earth, 
 there are yet those beacons of Immortality 
 burning in the sky — '* 
 
 Pausinjr, as I uttered the word " im- 
 mortality," with a sigh to think how little 
 my heart echoed to my lips, I looked 
 in the face of the maiden, and saw that it 
 had lighted up, as I spoke, into a glow of 
 holy animation, such as Faith alone gives 
 — such as Hope herself wears, when she 
 is dreaming of heaven. Touched by the 
 contrast, and gazing upon her with mourn- 
 ful tenderness, I found my arms half 
 opened, to clasp her to my heart, while 
 the words died away inaudibly upon my 
 lips, — " thou, too, beautiful maiden ! 
 must thou, too, die for ever ?" 
 
 My self-command, I felt, had nearly 
 deserted me. Rising abruptly from my 
 seat, I walked to the middle of the deck, 
 and stood, for some moments, uncon- 
 sciously gazing upon one of those fires,
<#PG# 173>

 
 
 which, — as is the custom of all who travel 
 by night upon the Nile, — our boatmen 
 had just kindled, to scare away the croco- 
 diles from the vessel. But it was in vain 
 that I endeavoured to compose my spirit. 
 Every effort I made but more deeply con- 
 vinced me, that, till the mystery which 
 hung round that maiden should be solved 
 — till the secret, with which my own 
 bosom laboured, .should be disclosed — it 
 was fruitless to attempt even a semblance 
 of tranquillity. 
 
 My resolution was therefore taken ; — 
 to lay open, at least, my own heart, as far 
 as such a revelation might be risked, 
 without startling the timid innocence of 
 my companion. Thus resolved, I returned, 
 with more composure, to my seat by 
 her side, and taking from my bosom the 
 small mirror which she had dropped in 
 the Temple, and which I had ever since 
 worn suspended round my neck, presented 
 it with a trembling hand to her view. 
 The boatmen had just kindled one of their
<#PG# 174>

 
 
 night-fires near us, and its light, as she 
 leaned forward towards the mirror, fell on 
 her face. 
 
 The quick blush of surprise with which 
 she recognised it to be hers, and her look 
 of bashful, yet eager, inquiry, in raising 
 her eyes to mine, were appeals to which 
 I was not, of course, slow in answering. 
 Beginning with the first moment when 
 I saw her in the Temple, and passing 
 hastily, but with words that burned as 
 they went, over the impression which she 
 had then left upon my heart and fancy, 
 I proceeded to describe the particulars of 
 my descent into the pyramid — my sur- 
 prise and adoration at the door of the 
 chapel — my encounter with the Trials of 
 Initiation, so mysteriously prepared for 
 me, and all the various visionary wonders 
 I had witnessed in that region, till the 
 moment when I had seen her stealing from 
 under the Veils to approach me. 
 
 Though, in detailing these events, I had 
 said but little of the feelings they had
<#PG# 175>

 
 
 awakened in me, — though my lips had 
 sent back many a sentence, unuttered, 
 there was still enough that could neither 
 be subdued or disguised, and which, like 
 that light from under the veils of her own 
 Isis, glowed through every word that I 
 spoke. When I told of the scene in the 
 chapel, — of the silent interview which I 
 had witnessed between the dead and the 
 living, — the maiden leaned down her head 
 and wept, as from a heart full of tears. 
 It seemed a pleasure to her, however, 
 to listen; and, when she looked at me 
 again, there was an earnest and affec- 
 tionate cordiality in her eyes, as if the 
 knowledge of my having been present at 
 that mournful scene had opened a new 
 source of sympathy and intelligence be- 
 tween us. So nein;hbourin<r are the foun- 
 tains of Love and of Sorrow, and so 
 imperceptibly do they often mingle their 
 streams. 
 
 Little, indeed, as I was guided by art 
 or design, in my manner and conduct to
<#PG# 176>

 
 
 this innocent girl, not all the most ex- 
 perienced gallantry of the Garden could 
 have dictated a policy half so seductive as 
 that which my new master, Love, now 
 taught me. Tlie ardour which, shown 
 at once, and without reserve, might have 
 startled a heart so little prepared for it, being 
 thus checked and softened by the timidity 
 of real love, won its way without alarm, 
 and, when most diffident of success, most 
 triumphed. Like one whose sleep is 
 gradually broken by music, the maiden's 
 heart was awakened without being dis- 
 turbed. She followed the charm, uncon- 
 scious whither it led, nor was aware of the 
 flame she had lighted in another's bosom, 
 till she perceived the reflection of it glim- 
 mering in her own. 
 
 Impatient as I was to appeal to her 
 generosity and sympathy, for a similar 
 proof of confidence to that which I had 
 just given, the night was now too far 
 advanced for me to impose such a task 
 upon her. After exchanging a few words,
<#PG# 177>

 
 
 in which, though little was said, there 
 was a tone and manner that spoke far 
 more than language, we took a lingering 
 leave of each other for the night, with 
 every prospect of still being together in 
 our dreams.
<#PG# 178>

 
 
 CHAP. XIII. 
 
 It was so near the dawn of day when 
 we parted, that we found the sun sink- 
 ing westward when we rejoined each 
 other. The smile with which she met me, 
 — so frankly cordial, — might have been 
 taken for the greeting of a long mellowed 
 friendship, did not the blush and the cast- 
 down eyelid, that followed, give symptoms 
 of a feeling newer and less calm. For 
 myself, lightened as I was, in some degree, 
 by the confession which I had made, I 
 was yet too conscious of the new aspect 
 thus given to our intercourse, to feel al- 
 together unembarrassed at the prospect of 
 returning to the theme. It was, therefore, 
 willingly we both suffered our attention to 
 be diverted, by the variety of objects that 
 presented themselves on the way, from a 
 subject that both equally trembled to ap- 
 proach.
<#PG# 179>

 
 
 The river was now full of life and 
 motion. Every moment we met with 
 boats descending the current, so inde- 
 pendent of aid from sail or oar, that the 
 sailors sat idly upon the deck as they shot 
 along, singing or playing upon their 
 double-reeded pipes. Of these boats, the 
 greater number came loaded with those 
 large emeralds, from the mine in the 
 desert, whose colours, it is said, are 
 brightest at the full of the moon, while 
 some were laden with frankincense from 
 the acacia-groves near the Red Sea. On 
 the decks of others, that had been to the 
 Golden Mountains beyond Syene, were 
 heaped blocks and fragments of that sweet- 
 smelling wood, which the Green Nile of 
 Nubia washes down in the season of the 
 floods. 
 
 Our companions up the stream were 
 far less numerous. Occasionally a boat, 
 returninn; lightened from the fair of last 
 night, with those high sails that catch 
 every breeze from over the hills, shot past
<#PG# 180>

 
 
 US ; — while, now and then, we overtook 
 one of those barges full of bees, that at 
 this season of the year, are sent to co- 
 lonise the gardens of the south, and take 
 advantage of the first flowers after the 
 inundation has passed away. 
 
 By these various objects we were en- 
 abled, for a short time, to divert the con- 
 versation from lighting and setding upon 
 the one subject, round which it continually 
 hovered. But the effort, as might be ex- 
 pected, was not long successful. As even- 
 ing advanced, the whole scene became 
 more solitary. We less frequently ven- 
 tured to look upon each other, and our 
 intei'vals of silence grew more long. 
 
 It was near sunset, when, in passing a 
 small temple on the shore, whose por- 
 ticoes were now full of the evening light, 
 we saw issuing from a thicket of acanthus 
 near it, a train of young maids linked to- 
 gether gracefully in the dance by lotus- 
 stems held at arms' length between them.
<#PG# 181>

 
 
 Their tresses were also wreathed with this 
 emblem of the season, and such a profu- 
 sion of the white flowers were twisted 
 round their waists and arms, that they 
 might have been taken, as they lightly 
 bounded along the bank, for Nymphs of 
 the Nile, risen freshly from their gardens 
 under the wave. 
 
 After looking for a few moments at 
 this sacred dance, the maid turned away 
 her eyes, with a look of pain, as if the re- 
 membrances it recalled were of no wel- 
 come nature. This momentary retrospect, 
 this glimpse into the past, seemed to offer 
 a sort of clue to the secret for which I 
 panted ; — and, gradually and delicately 
 as my impatience would allow, I availed 
 myself of the opening. Her frankness, 
 however, saved me the embarrassment of 
 much questioning. She even seemed to 
 feel that the confidence I sought was due 
 to me, and beyond the natural hesitation of 
 maidenly modesty, not a shade of reserve 
 or evasion appeared.
<#PG# 182>

 
 
 To attempt to repeat, in her own touch- 
 ing words, the simple story which she now 
 related to me, would be like endeavouring 
 to note down some strain of unpremeditated 
 music, with those fugitive graces, those 
 felicities of the moment, which no art can 
 restore, as they first met the ear. From 
 a feeling, too, of humility, she had omitted 
 in her narrative some particulars relating 
 to herself, which I afterwards learned ; — 
 while others, not less important, she but 
 slightly passed over, from a fear of wound- 
 ing the prejudices of her heathen hearer. 
 
 I shall, therefore, give her story, as the 
 outline which she, herself, sketched was 
 afterwards filled up by a pious and ve- 
 nerable hand, — far, far more worthy than 
 mine of being associated with the memory 
 of such purity. 
 
 I 2
<#PG# 183>

 
 
 STORY OF ALETHE. 
 
 " The mother of this maiden was the 
 beautiful Theora of Alexandria, who, 
 though a native of that city, was descended 
 from Grecian parents. When very young, 
 Theora was one of the seven maidens 
 selected to note down the discourses of 
 the eloquent Origen, who, at that period, 
 presided over the School of Alexandria, 
 and was in all the fulness of his fame both 
 among Pagans and Christians. Endowed 
 richly with the learning of both creeds, 
 he brought the natural light of philosophy 
 to elucidate the mysteries of faith, and 
 was only proud of his knowledge of the 
 wisdom of this world, inasmuch as it mi- 
 nistered to the triumph of divine truth. 
 
 " Though he had courted in vain the 
 crown of martyi'dom, it was held, through- 
 out his life, suspended over his head, and in 
 more than one persecution, he had evinced 
 his readiness to die for that faith which he 
 lived but to testify and adorn. On one of
<#PG# 184>

 
 
 these occasions, his tormentors, having ha- 
 bited him Hke an Egyptian priest, placed 
 him upon the steps of the Temple of Sera- 
 pis, and commanded that he should, in the 
 manner of the Pagan ministers, present 
 palm-branches to the multitude who went 
 up to the shrine. But the courageous 
 Christian disappointed their views. Hold- 
 ing forth the branches with an unshrinking 
 hand, he cried aloud, ' Come hither and 
 take the branch, not of an Idol Temple, 
 but of Christ.' 
 
 . " So indefatigable was this learned 
 Father in his studies, that, while com- 
 posing his Commentary on the Scriptures, 
 he was attended by seven scribes or nota- 
 ries, who relieved each other in taking 
 down the dictates of his eloquent tongue; 
 while the same number of young females, 
 selected for the beauty of their penmanship, 
 were employed in arranging and tran- 
 scribing the precious leaves. 
 
 " Among the scribes so selected, was the 
 fair young Theora, whose parents, though 
 
 I 3
<#PG# 185>

 
 
 attached to the Pagan worship, were not 
 
 unwilling to profit by the accomplishments 
 
 of their daughter, thus devoted to a task 
 
 which tliey considered purely mechanical. 
 
 To the maid herself, however, her task 
 
 brought far other feelings and Conse- 
 co o 
 
 quences. She read anxiously as she wrote, 
 and the divine truths, so eloquently illus- 
 trated, fround their way, by degrees, from 
 the page to her heart. Deeply, too, as 
 the written words affected her, the dis- 
 courses from the lips of the great teacher 
 himself, which she had frequent oppor- 
 tunities of hearing, sunk still more deeply 
 into her mind. There was, at once, a 
 sublimity and gentleness in his views of 
 I'eligion, which, to the tender hearts and 
 lively imaginations of women, never failed 
 to appeal with convincing power. Accord- 
 ingly, the list of his female pupils was 
 numerous; and the names of Barbara, 
 Juliana, Herais, and others, bear honour- 
 able testimony to his influence over that 
 sex.
<#PG# 186>

 
 
 *' To Theora the feeling, with which his 
 discourses inspired her, was hke a new soul, 
 — a consciousness of spiritual existence, 
 unfelt before. By the eloquence of the 
 comment she was awakened into admira- 
 tion of the text ; and when, by the kindness 
 of a Catechumen of the school, who had 
 been struck by her innocent zeal, she, for 
 the first time, became possessor of a copy 
 of the Scriptures, she could not sleep for 
 thinkinn; of her sacred treasure. With 
 a mixture of pleasure and fear she hid 
 it from all eyes, and was like one who had 
 received a divine guest under her roof, 
 and felt fearful of betraying its divinity to 
 the world. 
 
 " A heart so awake would have been 
 easily secured to the faith, had her oppor- 
 tunities of hearing the sacred word con- 
 tinned. But circumstances arose to de- 
 prive her of this advantage. The mild 
 Origen, long harassed and thwarted in 
 his labours by the tyranny of the Bishop 
 of Alexandria, Demetrius, was obliged to 
 
 I 4
<#PG# 187>

 
 
 relinquish his school and fly from Egypt. 
 The occupation of the fair scribe was, 
 tlierefore, at an end : her intercourse with 
 the followers of the new faith ceased ; and 
 the acrowinff enthusiam of her heart gave 
 way to more worldly impressions. 
 
 " Love, among the rest, had its share 
 in alienating her thoughts from religion. 
 While still very young, she became the 
 wife of a Greek adventurer, who had 
 come to Egypt as a purchaser of that rich 
 tapestry, in which the needles of Persia are 
 rivalled by the looms of the Nile. Having 
 taken his young bride to Memphis, which 
 was still the great mart of this merchan- 
 dise, he there, in the midst of his specu- 
 lations, died, — leaving his widow on the 
 pomt of becoming a mother, while, as yet, 
 but in her nineteenth year. 
 
 " For single and unprotected females, it 
 has been, at all times, a favourite resource, 
 to seek admission into the service of some of 
 those great temples which absorb so much 
 of the wealth and power of Egypt. In most
<#PG# 188>

 
 
 of these institutions there exists an order of 
 Priestesses, which, though not hereditary, 
 like that of the Priests, is provided for by 
 ample endowments, and confers that rank 
 and station, with which, in a government 
 so theocratic. Religion is sure to invest 
 even her humblest handmaids. From the 
 general policy of the Sacred College of 
 Memphis, it may be concluded, that an 
 accomplished female, like Theora, found 
 but little difficulty in being chosen one of 
 the Priestesses of Isis ; and it was in the 
 service of the subterranean shrines that 
 her ministry chiefly lay. 
 
 " Here, a month or two after her admis- 
 sion, she gave birth to Alethe, who first 
 opened her eyes among the unholy pomps 
 and specious miracles of this mysterious 
 region. Though Theora, as we have 
 seen, had been diverted by other feelings 
 from her first enthusiasm for the Christian 
 faith, she had never wholly forgot the 
 impression then made upon her. The 
 sacred volume, which the pious Catechu- 
 
 I 5
<#PG# 189>

 
 
 men had given her, was still treasured 
 with care ; and, though she seldom opened 
 its pages, there was an idea of sanctity as- 
 sociated with it in her memory, and often 
 would she sit to look upon it with reveren- 
 tial pleasure, recalling the happiness she 
 felt when it was first made her own. 
 
 "The leisure of her new retreat, and 
 the lone melancholy of widowhood, led 
 her still more frequently to indulge in 
 such thoughts, and to recur to those con- 
 soling; truths which she had heard in 
 the school of Alexandria. She now began 
 to peruse eagerly the sacred book, drink- 
 ing deep of the fountain of which she be- 
 fore but tasted, and feeling — what thou- 
 sands of mourners, since her, have felt — 
 that Christianity is the true religion of the 
 sorrowful. 
 
 " This study of her secret hours became 
 still more dear to her, from the very peril 
 with which, at that period, it was attended, 
 and the necessity she felt herself under of 
 concealing from those around her the pre-
<#PG# 190>

 
 
 cious light that had been thus kindled in 
 her heart. Too timid to encounter the 
 fierce persecution, which awaited all who 
 were suspected of a leaning to Christianity, 
 she continued to officiate in the pomps 
 and ceremonies of the Temple; — though, 
 often, with such remorse of soul, that she 
 would pause, in the midst of the rites, 
 and pray inwardly to God, that he would 
 forgive her this profanation of his Spirit. 
 
 " In the mean time her daughter, the 
 young Alethe, grew up still lovelier 
 than herself, and added, every hour, to 
 her happiness and her fears. ^Vhen ar- 
 rived at a sufficient age, she was taught, 
 like the other children of the priestesses, 
 to take a share in the service and cere- 
 monies of the shrines. The duty of some 
 of these young servitors was to look after 
 the flowers for the altar ; — of others, to 
 take care that the sacred vases were filled 
 every day with fresh water from the Nile. 
 The task of some was to preserve, in per- 
 fect polish, those silver images of the Moon 
 
 I 6
<#PG# 191>

 
 
 which the priests carried in processions; 
 while others were, as we have seen, em- 
 ployed in feeding the consecrated animals, 
 and in keeping their plumes and. scales 
 bright for the admiring eyes of their wor- 
 shippers. 
 
 " The office allotted to Alethe — the 
 most honourable of these minor ministries 
 — was to wait upon the sacred birds of 
 the moon, to feed them with those eggs 
 from the Nile which they loved, and pro- 
 vide for their use that purest water, which 
 alone these delicate birds will touch. 
 This employment was the delight of her 
 childish hours; and that ibis, which Al- 
 ciphron (the Epicurean) saw her dance 
 round in the Temple, was her favourite, 
 of all the sacred flock, and had been daily 
 fondled and fed by her from infancy. 
 
 " Music, as being one of the chief spells 
 of this enchanted region, was an accom- 
 plishment required of all its ministrants; 
 and the harp, the lyre, and the sacred 
 flute, sounded nowhere so sweetly as
<#PG# 192>

 
 
 through these subterranean gardens. The 
 chief object, indeed, in the education of 
 the youth of the Temple, was to fit them, 
 by every grace of art and nature, to give 
 effect to the illusion of those shows and 
 phantasms, in which the whole charm and 
 secret of Initiation lay. 
 
 " Among the means employed to sup- 
 port the old system of superstition, against 
 the infidelity and, still more, the new 
 Faith that menaced it, was an increased 
 prodigality of splendour and marvels in 
 those Mysteries for which Egypt has so long 
 been celebrated. Of these ceremonies so 
 many imitations had, under various names, 
 multiplied through Europe, that the 
 parent superstition ran a risk of being 
 eclipsed by its progenj'^; and, in order 
 still to retain their rank of the first Priest- 
 hood in the world, those of Egypt found 
 it necessary to continue still the best im- 
 postors. 
 
 " Accordingly, every contrivance that 
 art could devise, or labour execute — every
<#PG# 193>

 
 
 resource that the wonderful knowledge of 
 the Priests, in pyrotechny, mechanics, and 
 dioptrics, could command, was brought 
 into action to heighten the effect of their 
 Mysteries, and give an air of enchantment 
 to every thing connected with them. 
 
 " The final scene of beatification — the 
 Elysium, into which the Initiate was re- 
 ceived, — formed, of course, the leading 
 attraction of these ceremonies ; and to 
 render it captivating alike to the senses of 
 the man of pleasure, and the imagination 
 of the spiritualist, was the object to which 
 the whole skill and attention of the Sacred 
 College were devoted. By the influence 
 of the Priests of Memphis over those of 
 the other Temples they had succeeded in 
 extending their subterranean frontier, both 
 to the north and south, so as to include, 
 within their ever-lighted Paradise, some 
 of the gardens excavated for the use of the 
 other Twelve Shrines. 
 
 " The beauty of the young Alethe, the 
 touching sweetness of her voice, and the
<#PG# 194>

 
 
 sensibility that breathed throughout her 
 every look and movement, rendered her 
 a powerful auxiliary in such appeals to the 
 imagination. She was, accordingly, from 
 her childhood, selected from among her 
 fair companions, as the most worthy re- 
 presentative of spiritual loveliness, in those 
 pictures of Elysium — those scenes of 
 another world — by which not only the 
 fancy, but the reason, of the excited 
 Aspirants was dazzled. 
 
 " To the innocent child herself these 
 shows were pastime. But to Theora, who 
 knew too well the imposition to which they 
 were subservient, this profanation of all 
 that she loved was a perpetual source of 
 horror and remorse. Often would she — 
 when Alethe stood smiling before her, 
 arrayed, perhaps, as a spirit of the Elysian 
 world, — turn away, with a shudder, from 
 the happy child, almost fancying that she 
 already saw the shadows of sin descend- 
 ing over that innocent brow, as she gazed 
 on it.
<#PG# 195>

 
 
 " As the intellect of the young maid 
 became more active and inquiring, the ap- 
 prehensions and difficulties of the mother 
 increased. Afraid to communicate her 
 own precious secret, lest she should in- 
 volve her child in the dangers that en- 
 compassed it, she yet felt it to be no less 
 a cruelty than a crime to leave her wholly 
 immersed in the darkness of Paganism. 
 In this dilemma, the only resource that 
 remained to her was to select, and dis- 
 engage from the dross that surrounded 
 them, those pure particles of truth which 
 lie at the bottom of all religions ; — those 
 feelings, rather than doctrines, which God 
 has never left his creatures deprived of, and 
 which, in all ages, have furnished, to those 
 who sought it, some clue to his glory. 
 
 " The unity and perfect goodness of the 
 Creator ; the fall of the human soul into 
 corruption; its struggles with the dark- 
 ness of this world, and its final redemption 
 and re-ascent to the source of all spirit ; — 
 these natural solutions of the problem of
<#PG# 196>

 
 
 our existence, these elementary grounds 
 of all religion and virtue, which Theora 
 had heard illustrated by her Christian 
 teacher, lay also, she knew, veiled under the 
 theology of Egypt; and to impress them, 
 in all their abstract purity, upon the mind 
 of her susceptible pupil, was, in default of 
 more heavenly lights, her sole ambition 
 and care. 
 
 " It was their habit, after devoting their 
 mornings to the service of the Temple, to 
 pass their evenings and nights in one of those 
 small mansions above ground, allotted to 
 some of the most favoured Priestesses, 
 in the precincts of the Sacred College. 
 Here, out of the reach of those gross su- 
 perstitions, which pursued them, at every 
 step, below, she endeavoured to inform, 
 as far as she might, the mind of her be- 
 loved girl ; and found it lean as naturally 
 and instinctively to truth, as plants that 
 have been long shut up in darkness will, 
 when light is let in, incline themselves to 
 its rays.
<#PG# 197>

 
 
 *' Frequently, as they sat together on the 
 terrace at niglit, contemplating that as- 
 sembly of glorious stars, whose beauty 
 first misled mankind into idolatiy, she 
 would explain to the young listener by 
 what gradations it was that the worship, 
 thus transferred from the Creator to the 
 creature, sunk lower and lower in the 
 scale of being, till man, at length, pre- 
 sumed to deify man, and by the most 
 monstrous of inversions, heaven was at last 
 made the mirror of earth, reflecting all its 
 most earthly features. 
 
 " Even in the Temple itself, the anxious 
 mother would endeavour to interpose her 
 purer lessons among the idolatrous cere- 
 monies in which they were engaged. When 
 the favourite ibis of Alethe took its station 
 on the shrine, and the young maiden was 
 seen approaching, with all the gravity of 
 worship, the very bird which she had played 
 with but an hour before, — when the aca- 
 cia-bough, which she herself had plucked, 
 seemed to acquire a sudden sacredness in
<#PG# 198>

 
 
 her eyes, as soon as the priest had breathed 
 on it, — on all such occasions Theora, 
 though with fear and trembling, would 
 venture to suggest to the youthful wor- 
 shipper the distinction that should be 
 drawn between the sensible object of ador- 
 ation, and that spiritual, unseen Deity, of 
 which it was but the remembrancer or 
 type. 
 
 " With sorrow, however, she soon dis- 
 covered that, in thus but partially letting in 
 light upon a mind too ardent to be satis- 
 fied with such glimmerings, she only bewil- 
 dered the heart that she meant to guide, 
 and cut down the hope round which its 
 faith twined, without substituting any 
 other support in its place. As the beauty, 
 too, of Alethe began to attract all eyes, 
 new fears crowded upon the mother's 
 heart ; — fears, in which she was but too 
 much justified by the characters of some 
 of those around her. 
 
 " In this sacred abode, as may easily 
 be conceived, morality did not always
<#PG# 199>

 
 
 go hand and hand with religion. The hy- 
 pocritical and ambitious Orcus, who was, 
 at this period, High Priest of Memphis, 
 was a man, in every respect, qualified to 
 preside over a system of such splendid 
 fraud. He had reached that effective 
 time of life, when enough of the warmth 
 of youth remains to give animation to the 
 counsels of age. But, in his instance, youth 
 had only the baser passions to bequeath, 
 while age but brought with it a more 
 refined maturity of mischief. The advan- 
 tages of a faith appealing so wholly to the 
 senses, were well understood by him ; nor 
 was he ignorant that the only way of 
 makinff religion subservient to his own 
 interests was by shaping it adroitly to the 
 passions of others. 
 
 The state of misery and remorse in 
 which the mind of Theora was kept by 
 the scenes, however veiled by hypocrisy, 
 which she witnessed around her, became 
 at length intolerable. No perils that the 
 cause of truth could bring with it would
<#PG# 200>

 
 
 be half so dreadful as this endurance 
 of sinfulness and deceit. Her child was, 
 as yet, pure and innocent ; — but, without 
 that sentinel of the soul, Religion, how 
 lonoj might she continue so ? 
 
 " This thought at once decided her ; — 
 all other fears vanished before it. She 
 resolved instantly to lay open to Alethe the 
 whole secret of her soul ; to make her, 
 who was her only hope on earth, the 
 sharer of all her hopes in heaven, and 
 then fly with her, as soon as possible, from 
 this unhallowed place, to the desert — to 
 the mountains — to any place, however 
 desolate, where God and the conscious- 
 ness of innocence might be with them. 
 
 " The promptitude with which her 
 young pupil caught from her the divine 
 truths, was even beyond what she expected. 
 It was like the lighting of one torch at 
 another, — so prepared was Alethe's mind 
 for the illumination. Amply was the 
 mother now repaid for all her misery, by 
 this perfect communion of love and faith,
<#PG# 201>

 
 
 and by the delight with which she saw 
 her beloved child — hke the young an- 
 telope, when first led by her dam to the 
 well, — drink thirstily by her side^ at the 
 source of all life and truth. 
 
 *' But such happiness was not long to 
 last. The anxieties that Theora had 
 suffered preyed upon her health. She 
 felt her strength daily decline; and the 
 thoughts of leaving, alone and unguarded 
 in the world, that treasure which she had 
 just devoted to heaven, gave her a feeling 
 of despair which but hastened the ebb of 
 life. Had she put in practice her resolu- 
 tion of flying from this place, her child 
 might have been now beyond the reach 
 of all she dreaded, and in the solitude 
 of the wilderness would have found at 
 least safety ft-om wrong. But the very 
 happiness she had felt in her new task 
 diverted her from this project ; — and it 
 was now too late, for she was already 
 dying.
<#PG# 202>

 
 
 " She concealed, however, her state from 
 the tender and sanguine girl, who, though 
 she saw the traces of disease on her mo- 
 ther's cheek, little knew that they were the 
 hastening footsteps of death, nor thought 
 even of the possibility of losing what was 
 so dear to her. Too soon, however, 
 the moment of separation arrived ; and 
 while the anguish and dismay of Alethe 
 were in proportion to the security in 
 which she had indulged, Theora, too, 
 felt, with bitter regret, that she had sacri- 
 ficed to her fond consideration much pre- 
 cious time, and that there now remained 
 but a few brief and painful moments, for 
 the communication of all those wishes and 
 instructions on which the future destiny 
 of the young orphan depended. 
 
 " She had, indeed, time for little more 
 than to place the sacred volume solemnly 
 in her hands, to im^jlore that she would, 
 at all risks, fly from this unholy place, 
 and, pointing in the direction of the moun- 
 tains of the Said, to name, with her last
<#PG# 203>

 
 
 breath, the holy man, to whoin, under 
 heaven, she trusted for the protection and 
 salvation of her child. 
 
 " The first violence of feeling to which 
 Alethe gave way was succeeded by a fixed 
 and tearless grief, which rendered her in- 
 sensible, for some time, to the dangers of 
 her situation. Her only comfort was in 
 visiting that monumental chapel where the 
 beautiful remains of Theora lay. There, 
 night after night, in contemplation of 
 those placid features, and in prayers for 
 the peace of the departed spirit, did she 
 pass her lonely, and — sad as they were 
 — happiest hours. Though the mystic 
 emblems that decorated that chapel were 
 but ill-suited to the slumber of a Christian 
 saint, there was one among them, the Cross, 
 which, by a remarkable coincidence, is an 
 emblem common alike to the Gentile and 
 the Christian, — being, to the former, a 
 shadowy type of that immortality, of 
 which, to the latter, it is a substantial and 
 assuring pledge.
<#PG# 204>

 
 
 " Nightly, upon this cross, which she 
 had often seen her lost mother kiss, did 
 she breathe forth a solemn and heartfelt 
 vow, never to abandon the faith which that 
 departed spirit had bequeathed to her. 
 To such enthusiasm, indeed, did her heart 
 at such moments rise, that, but for the 
 last injunctions from those pallid lips, she 
 would, at once, have avowed her perilous 
 secret, and spoken out the words, ' I 
 am a Christian,' among those benighted 
 shrines ! 
 
 " But the will of her, to whom she owed 
 more than life, was to be obeyed. To 
 escape from this haunt of superstition 
 must now, she felt, be her first object ; 
 and, in devising the means of effecting it, 
 her mind, day and night, was employed. 
 It was with a loathing not to be con- 
 cealed she now found herself compelled 
 to resume her idolatrous services at the 
 shrine. To some of the offices of Theora 
 she succeeded, as is the custom, by inhe- 
 ritance ; and in the performance of these 
 
 K
<#PG# 205>

 
 
 — sanctified as they were in her eyes by 
 the pure spirit she had seen engaged in 
 them — there was a sort of mehincholy 
 pleasure in which her sorrow found re- 
 lief. But the part she was again forced 
 to take, in the scenic shows of the Mys- 
 teries, brought with it a sense of wrong 
 and degradation which she could no longer 
 bear. 
 
 " She had already foraied, in her own 
 mind, a plan of escape, in which her know- 
 ledge of all the windings of this subterra- 
 nean realm gave her confidence, when the 
 reception of Alciphron, as an Initiate, took 
 place. 
 
 "^ From the first moment of the land- 
 ing of that philosopher at Alexandria, he 
 had become an object of suspicion and 
 watchfulness to the inquisitorial Orcus, 
 whom philosophy, in any shape, naturally 
 alarmed, but to whom the sect over which 
 the young Athenian presided was parti- 
 cularly obnoxious. The accomplishments 
 of Alciphron, his popularity, wherever he
<#PG# 206>

 
 
 went, and the freedom with which he 
 indulged his wit at the expense of re- 
 ligion, was all faithfully reported to the 
 High Priest by his spies, and stirred up 
 within him no kindly feelings towards 
 the stranger. In dealing with an infidel, 
 such a personage as Orcus could know no 
 other alternative but that of either con- 
 verting or destroying him ; and though 
 his spite, as a man, would have been more 
 gratified by the latter proceeding, his 
 pride, as a priest, led him to prefer the 
 triumph of the former. 
 
 " The first descent of the Epicurean into 
 the pyramid was speedily known, and the 
 alarm immediately given to the Priests 
 below. As soon as they had discovered 
 that the young philosopher of Athens was 
 the intruder, and that he not only still 
 continued to linger round the pyramid, but 
 was observed to look often and wistfully to- 
 wards the portal, it was concluded that his 
 curiosity would impel him to try a second 
 descent ; and Orcus, blessing the good 
 
 K 2
<#PG# 207>

 
 
 chance which had thus brought the wild 
 bird to his net, determined not to allow 
 an opportunity so precious to be wasted. 
 
 " Instantly, the whole of that wonderful 
 machinery, by which the phantasms and 
 illusions of Initiation are produced, were 
 put in active preparation throughout that 
 subterranean realm ; and the increased 
 stir and watchfulness excited among its 
 inmates, by this more than ordinary dis- 
 play of all the resources of priestcraft, 
 rendered the accomplishment of Alethe's 
 design, at such a moment, peculiarly diffi- 
 cult. Wholly ignorant of the share which 
 she herself had taken in attracting the 
 young philosopher down to this region, 
 she but heard of him vaguely, as the 
 Chief a great Grecian sect, who had 
 been led, by either curiosity or accident, 
 to expose himself to the first trials of 
 Initiation, and whom the priests, she saw, 
 were endeavouring to ensnare in their 
 toils, by every art and skill with which 
 their science of darkness had gifted them.
<#PG# 208>

 
 
 *' To her mind, the image of a philo- 
 sopher, such as Alciphron had been re- 
 presented to her, came associated with 
 ideas of age and reverence; and, more 
 than once, the possibility of his being 
 made instrumental to her deliverance 
 flashed a hope across her heart in which 
 she could not help indulging. Often had 
 she been told by Theora of the many 
 Gentile sages, who had laid their wisdom 
 down humbly at the foot of the Cross; 
 and though this Inidate, she feared, could 
 hardly be among the number, yet the ru- 
 mours which she had gathered from the 
 servants of the Temple, of his undis- 
 guised contempt for the errors of hea- 
 thenism, led her to hope she might find 
 tolerance, if not sympathy, in her appeal 
 to him. 
 
 " Nor was it solely with a view to her 
 
 own chance of deliverance that she thus 
 
 connected him in her thoughts with the 
 
 plan which she meditated. The look of 
 
 K 3
<#PG# 209>

 
 
 proud and self-gratulating malice, with 
 which the High Priest had mentioned 
 this ' infidel,' as he styled him, when in- 
 structing her in the scene she was to 
 enact before the philosopher in the valley, 
 but too plainly informed her of the des- 
 tiny that hung over him. She knew how 
 many were the hapless candidates for 
 Initiation, who had been doomed to a 
 durance worse than that of the grave, for 
 but a word, a whisper breathed against 
 the sacred absurdities which they wit- 
 nessed ; and it was evident to her that 
 the venerable Greek (for such her fancy 
 represented Alciphron) was no less in- 
 terested in escaping from this region than 
 herself. 
 
 " Her own resolution was, at all events, 
 fixed. That visionary scene, in which she 
 had appeared before Alciphron, — little 
 knowing how ardent were the heart and 
 imagination, over which her beauty, at that 
 moment, exercised its influence, — was, 
 she solemnly resolved, the very last un-
<#PG# 210>

 
 
 holy service, that superstition or impos- 
 ture should ever command of her. 
 
 " On the following night the Aspirant 
 was to watch in the Great Temple of 
 Isis. Such an opportunity of approaching 
 and addressing; him might never come 
 again. Should he, from compassion for 
 her situation, or a sense of the danger of 
 his own, consent to lend his aid to her 
 flight, most gladly would she accept it, — 
 assured that no danger or treachery she 
 might risk could be half so dreadful as 
 those she left behind. Should he, on 
 the contrary, refuse, her determination 
 was equally fixed — to trust to that God 
 who watches over the innocent, and go 
 forth alone. 
 
 " To reach the island in Lake Moeris 
 was her first object; and there occurred 
 luckily, at this time, a mode of accom- 
 plishing it, by which the difficulty and 
 dangers of the attempt would be, in a 
 great degree, diminished. The day of 
 
 K 4-
<#PG# 211>

 
 
 the annual visitation of the High Priest 
 to the Place of Weeping — as that island 
 in the centre of the Lake is called — was 
 now fast approaching; and Alethe well 
 knew that the self-moving car, by which 
 the Pligh Priest and one of the Hiero- 
 phants are conveyed to the chambers 
 under the Lake, stood waiting in readiness. 
 By availing herself of this expedient, she 
 would gain the double advantage both of 
 facilitating her own flight, and retarding 
 the speed of her pursuers. 
 
 " Having paid a last visit to the tomb of 
 her beloved mother, and wept there, long 
 and passionately, till her heart almost 
 failed in the struggle, — having paused, too, 
 to give a kiss to her favourite ibis, which, 
 though too much a Christian to worship, 
 she was still child enough to love, — 
 with a trembling step she went early to 
 the Sanctuary, and hid herself in one 
 of the recesses of the Shrine. Her 
 intention was to steal out from thence to 
 Alciphron, while it was yet dark, and be-
<#PG# 212>

 
 
 fore the illumination of the great Statue 
 behind the Veils had begun. But her 
 fears delayed her till it was almost too 
 late ; — already was the image lighted up, 
 and still she remained trembling in her 
 hiding place. 
 
 " In a few minutes more the mighty Veils 
 would have been withdrawn, and the 
 glories of that scene of enchantment laid 
 open, — when, at length, summoning up 
 courage, and taking advantage of a mo- 
 mentary absence of those employed in the 
 preparations of this splendid mockery, she 
 stole from under the Veil and found her 
 way, through the gloom, to the Epi- 
 curean. There was then no time for 
 explanation ; — she had but to trust to 
 the simple words, ' Follow, and be silent ; ' 
 and the implicit readiness with which she 
 found them obeyed filled her with no less 
 surprise than the philosopher himself felt 
 in hearing them. 
 
 " In a second or two they were on their 
 way through the subterranean windings 
 
 K 5
<#PG# 213>

 
 
 leaving the ministers of Isis to waste their 
 splendours on vacancy, through a long 
 series of miracles and visions which they 
 now exhibited, — unconscious that he, 
 whom they took such pains to dazzle, 
 was already, under the guidance of the 
 young Christian, removed beyond the 
 reach of their deceiving spells."
<#PG# 214>

 
 
 CHAP. XIV. 
 
 Such was the story, of which this innocent 
 girl gave me, in her own touching lan- 
 guage, the outline. 
 
 The sun was just rising as she finished 
 her narrative. Fearful of encountering 
 the expression of those feelings with which, 
 she could not but observe, I was affected 
 by her recital, scarcely had she concluded 
 the last sentence, when, rising abruptly 
 from her seat, she hurried into the pavi- 
 lion, leaving me with the words already 
 crowding for utterance to my lips. 
 
 Oppressed by the various emotions thus 
 sent back upon my heart, I lay down 
 on the deck in a state of agitation, that 
 defied even the most distant approaches 
 of sleep. While every word she had 
 uttered, every feeling she expressed, but 
 K 6
<#PG# 215>

 
 
 ministered new fuel to that flame which 
 consumed me, and to describe which, pas- 
 sion is too weak a word, there was also 
 much of her recital that disheartened and 
 alarmed me. To find a Christian thus 
 under the garb of a Memphian Priestess, 
 was a discovery that, had my heart been 
 less deeply interested, would but have 
 more powerfully stimulated my imagin- 
 ation and pride. But, when I recollected 
 the austerity of the faith she had embraced, 
 — the tender and sacred tie, associated 
 with it in her memory, and the devotion 
 of woman's heart to objects thus conse- 
 crated, — her very perfections but widened 
 the distance between us, and all that most 
 kindled my passion at the same time chilled 
 my hopes. 
 
 Were we left to each other, as on this 
 silent river, in such undisturbed commu- 
 nion of thoughts and feelings, I knew too 
 well, I thought, both her sex's nature and 
 my own, to feel a doubt that love would 
 ultimately triumph. But the severity of
<#PG# 216>

 
 
 the guardianship to which I must resign 
 her, — that of some monk of the desert, 
 some stern Sohtary, — the influence such 
 a monitor would gain over her mind, and 
 the horror with which, ere long, she would 
 be taught to regard the reprobate infidel 
 on whom she now smiled, — in all this 
 prospect I saw nothing but despair. After 
 a few short hours, my happiness would be 
 at an end, and such a dark chasm then 
 open between our fates, as must sever them, 
 far as earth is from heaven, asunder. 
 
 It was true, she was .now wholly in my 
 power. I feared no witnesses but those of 
 earth, and the solitude of the desert was at 
 hand. But though I acknowledged not a 
 heaven, I worshipped her who was, to me, 
 its type and substitute. If, at any mo- 
 ment, a single thought of wrong or deceit, 
 towards a creature so sacred, arose within 
 my mind, one look from her innocent eyes 
 averted the sacrilege. Even passion itself 
 felt a holy fear in her presence, — like
<#PG# 217>

 
 
 the flame trembling in the breeze of the 
 sanctuary, — and Love, pure Love, stood 
 in place of Religion. 
 
 As long as I knew not her story, I could 
 indulge, at least, in dreams of the future. 
 But, now — what hope, what prospect re- 
 mained ? My sole chance of happiness lay 
 in the feeble hope of beguiling away her 
 thoughts from the plan which she me- 
 ditated ; of weaning her, by persuasion, 
 from that austere faith, which I had before 
 hated and now feared, and of attaching 
 her, perhaps, alone and unlinked as she 
 was in the world, to my own fortunes for 
 ever ! 
 
 In the agitation of these thoughts, I 
 had started from my resting-place, and 
 continued to pace up and down, under a 
 burning sun, till, exhausted both by thought 
 and feeling, I sunk down, amid that blaze 
 of light into a sleep, which, to my fevered 
 brain, seemed a sleep of fire. 
 
 On awaking, 1 found the veil of Alethe
<#PG# 218>

 
 
 laid carefully over my brow, while she, 
 herself, sat near me, under the shadow of 
 the sail, looking anxiously at that leaf, 
 which her mother had given her, and 
 employed apparently in comparing its out- 
 lines with the course of the river and the 
 forms of the rocky hills by which we were 
 passing. She looked pale and troubled, 
 and rose eagerly to meet me, as if she 
 had long and impatiently waited for my 
 waking. 
 
 Her heart, it was plain, had been dis- 
 turbed from its security, and was begin- 
 ning to take alarm at its own feelings. 
 But, though vaguely conscious of the peril 
 to which she was exposed, her reliance, as 
 is usually the case, increased with her dan- 
 ger, and on me, far more than on herself, 
 did she seem to depend for saving her 
 from it. To reach, as soon as possible, her 
 asylum in the desert, was now the urgent 
 object of her entreaties and wishes ; and 
 the self-reproach she expressed at having 
 permitted her thoughts to be diverted, for
<#PG# 219>

 
 
 a single moment, from this sacred purpose, 
 not only revealed the truth, that she had 
 forgotten it, but betrayed even a glimmer- 
 ing consciousness of the cause. 
 
 Her sleep, she said, had been broken 
 by ill-omened dreams. Every moment 
 the shade of her mother had stood before 
 her, rebuking her, with mournful looks, 
 for her delay, and pointing, as she had 
 done in death, to the eastern hills. Burst- 
 ing into tears at this accusing recollection, 
 she hastily placed the leaf, which she had 
 been examining, in my hands, and im- 
 plored that I would ascertain, without a 
 moment's delay, what portion of our voyage 
 was still unperformed, and in what space 
 of time we might hope to accomplish it. 
 
 I had, still less than herself, taken note 
 of either place or distance ; and, had we 
 been left to glide on in this dream of hap- 
 piness,'should never have thought of paus- 
 ing to ask where it would end. But such 
 confidence, I felt, was too sacred to be 
 deceived. Reluctant as I was, naturally, to
<#PG# 220>

 
 
 enter on an enquiry, which might so soon 
 dissipate even my last hope, her wish was 
 sufficient to supersede even the selfishness 
 of love, and on the instant I proceeded to 
 obey her will. 
 
 There is, on the eastern bank of the 
 Nile, to the north of Antinoe, a high and 
 steep rock, impending over the flood, 
 which for ages, from a prodigy connected 
 with it, has borne the name of the Moun- 
 tain of the Birds. Yearly, it is said, at 
 a certain season and hour, large flocks of 
 birds assemble in the ravine, of which this 
 rocky mountain forms one of the sides, 
 and are there observed to go through the 
 mysterious ceremony of inserting each its 
 beak into a particular cleft of the rock, 
 till the cleft closes upon one of their num- 
 ber, when the rest, taking wing, leave 
 the selected victim to die. 
 
 Through the ravine where this charm 
 — for such the multitude consider it — 
 is worked, there ran, in ancient times, a 
 canal from the Nile, to some great and
<#PG# 221>

 
 
 forgotten city, now buried in the desert. 
 To a short distance from tlie river this 
 canal still exists, but, soon after having 
 passed through the defile, its scanty 
 waters disappear altogether, and are lost 
 under the sands. 
 
 It was in the neighbourhood of this 
 place, as I could collect from the deline- 
 ations on the leaf, — where a flight of 
 birds represented the name of the moun- 
 tain, — that the dwelling of the Solitary, 
 to whom Aletlie was bequeathed, lay. 
 Imperfect as was my knowledge of the 
 geography of Egypt, it at once struck me, 
 that we had long since left this mountain 
 behind; and, on inquiring of our boat- 
 men, I found my conjecture confirmed. 
 We had, indeed, passed it, as appeared, 
 on the preceding night ; and, as the wind 
 had, ever since, blown strongly from the 
 north, and the sun was already declining 
 towards the horizon, we must now be, at 
 least, an ordinary day's sail to the south- 
 ward of the spot.
<#PG# 222>

 
 
 At this discovery, I own, my heart 
 felt a joy which I could with difficulty 
 conceal. It seemed to me as if fortune 
 was conspiring with love, and, by thus 
 delaying the moment of our separation, 
 afforded me at least a chance of happi- 
 ness. Her look, too, and manner, when 
 informed of our mistake, rather encou- 
 raged than chilled this secret hope. In 
 the first moment of astonishment, her 
 eyes opened upon me with a suddenness 
 of splendour, under which I felt my own 
 wink as if lightning had crossed them. 
 But she again, as suddenly, let their lids 
 fall, and, after a quiver of her lip, which 
 showed the conflict of feeling within, 
 crossed her arms upon her bosom, and 
 looked silently down upon the deck ; — 
 her whole countenance sinking into an 
 expression, sad, but resigned, as if she 
 felt, with me, that fate was on the side of 
 wrong, and saw Love already stealing 
 between her soul and heaven. 
 
 I was not slow in availing myself of
<#PG# 223>

 
 
 what I fancied to be the irresolution of 
 her mind. But, fearful of exciting alarm 
 by any appeal to tenderer feelings, I 
 but addressed myself to her imagination, 
 and to that love of novelty, which is 
 for ever fresh in the youthful breast. 
 We were now approaching that region of 
 wonders, Thebes. " In a day or two," 
 said I, " we shall see, towering above the 
 waters, the colossal Avenue of Sphinxes, 
 and the bright Obelisks of the Sun. 
 We shall visit the plain of Memnon, and 
 those mighty statues, that fling their sha- 
 dows at sunrise over the Libyan hills. 
 We shall hear the image of the Son of 
 the Morning answerinfj to the first touch 
 of light. From thence, in a few hours, 
 a breeze like this will transport us to 
 those sunny islands near the cataracts ; 
 there, to wander, among the sacred palm- 
 groves of PhiJoe, or sit, at noon-tide hour, 
 in those cool alcoves, which the waterfall 
 of Syene shadows under its arch. Oh, 
 who, with such scenes of loveliness within
<#PG# 224>

 
 
 reach, would turn coldly away to the bleak 
 desert, and leave this fair world, with all 
 its enchantments, shining behind them, 
 unseen and unenjoyed ? At least," — I 
 added, tenderly taking her by the hand, 
 
 — " at least, let a few more days be 
 stolen from the dreary fate to which thou 
 hast devoted thyself, and then " 
 
 She had heard but the last few words; — 
 the rest had been lost upon her. Startled by 
 the tone of tenderness into which, in spite 
 of all my resolves, my voice had softened, 
 she looked for an instant in my face, with 
 passionate earnestness ; — then, dropping 
 upon her knees with her clasped hands 
 upraised, exclaimed — " Tempt me not, 
 in the name of God I implore thee, 
 tempt me not to swerve from my sacred 
 duty. Oh, take me instantly to that de- 
 sert mountain, and I will bless thee for 
 ever." 
 
 This appeal, I felt, could not be resisted, 
 
 — though my heart were to break for it. 
 Having silently expressed my assent to
<#PG# 225>

 
 
 her prayer, by a pressure of her hand as 
 I raised her from the deck, I hastened, 
 as we were still in full career for the 
 south, to give orders that our sail should 
 be uistantly lowered, and not a moment 
 lost in retracing our course. 
 
 In proceeding, however, to give these 
 directions, it, for the first time, occurred 
 to me, that, as I had hired this yacht in 
 the neighbourhood of Memphis, where it 
 was probable that the flight of the young 
 fugitive would be most vigilantly tracked, 
 we should act imprudently in betraying 
 to the boatmen the place of her retreat; 
 — and the present seemed the most fa- 
 vourable opportunity of evading such a 
 danger. Desiring, therefore, that we 
 should be landed at a small village on 
 the shore, under pretence of paying a 
 visit to some shrine in the neighbour- 
 hood, I there dismissed our barge, and was 
 relieved from fear of fiirther observation, 
 by seemg it again set sail, and resume its 
 course fleedy up the current.
<#PG# 226>

 
 
 From the boats of all descriptions 
 that lay idle beside the bank, I now se- 
 lected one, which, in every respect, suited 
 my purpose, — being, in its shape and ac- 
 commodations, a miniature of our former 
 vessel, but so small and light as to be 
 manageable by myself alone, and, with the 
 advantage of the current, requiring little 
 more than a hand to steer it. This boat 
 I succeeded without much difficulty, in 
 purchasing, and, after a short delay, we 
 were again afloat down the current : — the 
 sun just then sinking, in conscious glory, 
 over his own golden shrines in the Libyan 
 waste. 
 
 The evening was more calm and lovely 
 than any that yet had smiled upon 
 our voyage ; and, as we left the bank, 
 there came soothingly over our ears a 
 strain of sweet, rustic melody from the 
 shore. It was the voice of a young Nubian 
 girl, whom we saw kneeling on the bank 
 before an acacia, and singing, while her 
 companions stood round, the wild song
<#PG# 227>

 
 
 of invocation, which, in her country, they 
 address to that enchanted tree : — 
 
 " Oh ! Abyssinian tree, 
 
 We pray, we pray to thee; 
 By the glow of thy golden fruit, 
 And the violet hue of thy flower. 
 
 And the greeting mute 
 
 Of thy bough's salute 
 To the stranger who seeks thy bower.* 
 
 11. 
 
 " Oh ! Abyssinian tree, 
 
 How the traveller blesses thee, 
 When the night no moon allows, 
 
 And the sun-set hour is near, 
 And thou bend'st thy boughs 
 To kiss his brows. 
 
 Saying, ' Come rest thee here.' 
 Oh ! Abyssinian tree, 
 Thus bow thy head to me!" 
 
 * See an account of this sensitive tree, which 
 bends down its branches to those who approach it, 
 in M. Jomard's Description of Syene and the Cata- 
 racts.
<#PG# 228>

 
 
 In the burden of this song the companions 
 of the young Nubian joined ; and we heard 
 the words, " Oh ! Abyssinian tree," dying 
 away on the breeze, long after the whole 
 group had been lost to our eyes. 
 
 Whether, in this new arrangement which 
 I had made for our voyage, any motive, 
 besides those which I professed, had a 
 share, I can scarcely, even myself, — so 
 bewildered were my feelings, — determine. 
 But no sooner had the current borne 
 us away from all human dwellings, and 
 we were alone on the waters, with not 
 a soul near, than I felt how closely such 
 solitude draws hearts together, and how 
 much more we seemed to belong to each 
 other, than when there were eyes around us. 
 
 The same feeling, but without the 
 same sense of its danger, was manifest in 
 every look and word of Alethe. The con- 
 sciousness of the one great eifort which 
 she had made appeared to have satisfied 
 her heart on the score of duty, — while 
 the devotedness with which she saw I 
 
 L
<#PG# 229>

 
 
 attended to her every wish, was felt with 
 all that gratitude which, in woman, is 
 the day-spring of love. She was, there- 
 fore, happy, innocently happy; and the 
 confiding, and even aifectionate, unreserv^e 
 of her manner, while it rendered my trust 
 more sacred, made it also far more dif- 
 ficult. 
 
 It was only, however, on subjects un- 
 connected with our situation or fate, 
 that she yielded to such interchange of 
 thought, or that her voice ventured to 
 answer mine. The moment I alluded to 
 the destiny that awaited us, all her cheer- 
 fulness fled, and she became saddened and 
 silent. When I described to her the 
 beauty of my own native land — its founts 
 of hispiration and fields of glory — her 
 eyes sparkled with sympathy, and some- 
 times even softened into fondness. But 
 when I ventured to whisper, that, in that 
 glorious country, a life full of love and 
 liberty awaited her ; when I proceeded 
 to contrast the adoration and bliss she
<#PG# 230>

 
 
 might command, with the gloomy austeri- 
 ties of the life to which she was hastening, 
 — it was like the coming of a sudden cloud 
 over a summer sky. Her head sunk, as 
 she listened; — I waited in vain for an 
 answer; and when, half playfully reproach- 
 ing her for this silence, I stooped to take 
 her hand, I could feel the warm tears fast 
 fallinfj over it. 
 
 But even this — feeble as was the hope it 
 held out — was still happiness. Though it 
 foreboded that I should lose her, it also 
 whispered that I was loved. Like that lake, 
 in the Land of Roses*, whose waters are 
 half sweet, half bitter, I felt my fate to be 
 a compound of bliss and pain, — but its 
 very pain well worth all ordinary bliss. 
 
 And thus did the hours of that night 
 pass along ; while every moment shortened 
 our happy dream, and the current seemed 
 to flow with a swifter pace than any that 
 
 * The province of Arsinoe, now Fiounu 
 L 2
<#PG# 231>

 
 
 ever yet hurried to the sea. Not a fea- 
 ture of the whole scene but is, at this 
 moment, freshly in my memory; — thg 
 broken star-light on the water ; — the 
 rippling sound of the boat, as, without 
 oar or sail, it went, like a thing of en- 
 chantment, down the stream ; — the scented 
 fire, burning beside us on the deck, and, 
 oh, that face, on which its light fell, re- 
 vealing, at every movement, some new 
 charm, some blush or look, more beautiful 
 than the last ! 
 
 Often, while I sat gazing, forgetful of 
 all else in this world, our boat, left wholly 
 to itself, would drive from its course, and, 
 bearing us away to the bank, get entangled 
 in the water-flowers, or be caught in some 
 eddy, ere I perceived where we were. 
 Once, too, when the rustling of my oar 
 among the flowers had startled away from 
 the bank some wild antelopes, that had 
 stolen, at that still hour, to drink of the 
 Nile, what an emblem did I think it of the
<#PG# 232>

 
 
 young heart beside me, — tasting, for the 
 first time, of hope and love, and so soon, 
 alas, to be scared from their sweetness 
 for ever ! 
 
 L 3
<#PG# 233>

 
 
 CHAP. XV. 
 
 The night was now far advanced ; — the 
 bend of our course towards the left, and 
 the closing in of the eastern hills upon the 
 river, gave warning of our approach to 
 the hermit's dwelling. Every minute now 
 seemed Hke the last of existence; and I 
 felt a sinking of despair at my heart, 
 which would have been intolerable, had 
 not a resolution that suddenly, and as if 
 by inspiration, occurred to me, presented 
 a glimpse of hope which, in some degree, 
 calmed my feelings. 
 
 Much as I had, all my life, despised hy- 
 pocrisy, — the very sect I had embraced 
 being chiefly recommended to me by the 
 war which they waged on the cant of all 
 others, — it was, nevertheless, in hypocrisy 
 that I now scrupled not to take refuge
<#PG# 234>

 
 
 from, what I dreaded more than shame or 
 death, my separation from Alethe. In 
 my despair, I adopted the humihating 
 plan — deeply humiliating as I felt it to 
 be, even amid the joy with which I wel- 
 comed it — of offering myself to this her- 
 mit, as a convert to his faith, and thus 
 becoming the fellow-disciple of Alethe 
 under his care ! 
 
 From the moment I resolved upon this 
 plan my spirit felt lightened. Though 
 having fully before my eyes the labyrinth 
 of imposture into which it would lead me, 
 I thought of nothing but the chance of 
 our being still together ; — in this hope, all 
 pride, all philosophy was forgotten, and 
 every thing seemed tolerable, but the 
 prospect of losmg her. 
 
 Thus resolved, it was with somewhat 
 less reluctant feelings, that 1 now under- 
 took, at the anxious desire of Alethe, to 
 ascertain the site of that well-known moun- 
 tain, in the neighbourhood of which the 
 dwelling of the anchoret lay. We had 
 
 L 4
<#PG# 235>

 
 
 already passed one or two stupendous 
 rocks, which stood, detached, like for- 
 tresses, over the river's brink, and which, 
 in some degree, corresponded with the 
 description on the leaf. So little was 
 there of life now stirring along the shores, 
 that I had begun almost to despair of any 
 assistance from inquiry, when, on looking 
 to the western bank, I saw a boatman 
 among the sedges, towing his small boat, 
 with some difficulty, up the current. Hail- 
 ing him as we passed, I asked, — " Where 
 stands the Mountain of the Birds?" — 
 and he had hardly time to answer, point- 
 ing above our heads, " There," when 
 we perceived that we were just then en- 
 tering into the shadow, which this mighty 
 rock flings across the whole of tlie flood. 
 
 In a few moments we had reached the 
 mouth of the ravine, of which the Moun- 
 tain of the Birds forms one of the sides, 
 and through which the scanty canal from 
 the Nile flows. At the sight of this chasm, 
 within some of whose gloomy recesses
<#PG# 236>

 
 
 — if we had rightly interpreted the leaf — 
 the dwelling of the Solitary lay, our voices, 
 at once, sunk into a low whisper, while 
 Alethe looked round upon me with a 
 superstitious fearfulness, as if doubtful 
 whether I had not already disappeared from 
 her side. A quick movement, however, 
 of her hand towards the ravine, told too 
 plainly that her purpose was still un- 
 changed. With my oars, therefore, check- 
 ing the career of our boat, I succeeded, 
 after no small exertion, in turninff it out 
 of the current of the river, and steerinsf 
 into this bleak and stagnant canal. 
 
 Our transition from life and bloom to 
 the very depth of desolation, was imme- 
 diate. While the water on one side of 
 the ravine lay buried in shadow, the white, 
 skeleton-like crags of the other stood 
 aloft in the pale glare of moonlight. The 
 sluggish stream through which we moved, 
 yielded sullenly to the oar, and the shriek 
 of a few water-birds, which we had roused 
 
 L 5
<#PG# 237>

 
 
 from their fastnesses, was succeeded by a 
 silence, so dead and awful, that our lips 
 seemed afraid to disturb it by a breath j 
 and half-whispered exclamations, " How 
 dreary ! " — " How dismal ! " — were al- 
 most the only words exchanged between 
 
 us. 
 
 We had proceeded for some time 
 through this gloomy defile, when, at a 
 distance before us, among the rocks on 
 which the moonlight fell, we perceived, 
 upon a ledge but little elevated above the 
 canal, a small hut or cave, which, from a 
 tree or two planted around it, had some 
 appearance of being the abode of a human 
 being. " This, then," thought I, " is the 
 home to which Alethe is destined ! " — A 
 chill of despair came again over my heart, 
 and the oars, as I gazed, lay motionless in 
 ray hands. 
 
 I found Alethe, too, whose eyes had 
 caught the same object, drawing closer to 
 my side than she had yet ventured. Lay- 
 ing her hand agitatedly upon mine, '* We
<#PG# 238>

 
 
 must here," she said, " part for ever." 
 I turned to her, as she spoke ; there was 
 a tenderness, a despondency in her coun- 
 tenance, that at once saddened and in- 
 flamed my soul. " Part ! " I exclaimed 
 passionately, — " No ! — the same God 
 shall receive us both. Thy faith, Alethe, 
 shall, from this hour, be mine, and I will 
 live and die in this desert with thee ! " 
 
 Her surprise, her delight, at these words, 
 was like a momentary delirium. The 
 wild, anxious smile, with which she looked 
 into my face, as if to ascertain whether 
 she had, indeed, heard my words arightj, 
 bespoke a happiness too much for reason 
 to bear. At length the fulness of her 
 heart found relief in tears ; and, mur- 
 muring forth an incoherent blessing on 
 my name, she let her head fall languidly 
 and powerlessly on my arm. The light 
 from our boat-fire shone upon her face. I 
 saw her eyes, which she had closed for a 
 moment, again opening upon me with the 
 same tenderness, and — merciful Provi- 
 
 L 6
<#PG# 239>

 
 
 (lence, how I remember that moment ! — 
 was on tlie point of bending down my lips 
 towards hers, when, suddenly, in the air 
 above our heads, as if it came from hea- 
 ven, there burst forth a strain of music 
 from a choir of voices, that with its solemn 
 sweetness filled the whole valley. 
 
 Breaking away from my caress at these 
 supernatural sounds, the maiden threw 
 herself trembling upon her knees, and, not 
 daring to look up, exclaimed wildly, " My 
 mother, oh my mother ! " 
 
 It was the Christian's morning hymn 
 that we heard; — the same, as I learned 
 afterwards, that, on their high terrace at 
 Memphis, she had been taught by her 
 mother to sing to the rising sun. 
 
 Scarcely less startled than my compa- 
 nion, I looked up, and, at the very sum- 
 mit of the rock above us, saw a light, 
 appearing to come from a small opening or 
 window, through which also the sounds, 
 that had appeared so supernatural, issued. 
 There could be no doubt, that we had
<#PG# 240>

 
 
 now found — if not the dwelling of the an- 
 choret — at least, the haunt of some of the 
 Christian brotherhood of these rocks, by 
 whose assistance we could not fail to find 
 the place of his retreat. 
 
 The affitation, into which Alethe had 
 been thrown by the first burst of that 
 psalmody, soon yielded to the soften- 
 ing recollections which it brought back ; 
 and a calm came over her brow, such 
 as it had never before worn, since we 
 met. She seemed to feel that she had 
 now reached her destined haven, and to 
 hail, as the voice of heaven itself, those 
 sounds by which she was welcomed to it. 
 
 In her tranquillity, however, I was far 
 from yet sympathizing. Impatient to know 
 all that awaited her and myself, I pushed 
 our boat close to the base of the rock, 
 — directly under that lighted window on 
 the summit, to find my way up to which 
 was now my first object. Having hastily 
 received my instructions from Alethe, 
 and made her repeat again the name of
<#PG# 241>

 
 
 the Cliristian whom we souglit, I sprang 
 upon the bank, and was not long in dis- 
 covering a sort of rude stair-way, cut 
 out of the rock, but leading, I found, by 
 easy windings, up the steep. 
 
 After ascending for some time, I arrived 
 at a level space or ledge, which the hand 
 of labour had succeeded in converting 
 into a garden, and which was planted, 
 here and there, with fig-trees and palms. 
 Around it, too, I could perceive, through 
 the glimmering light, a number of small 
 caves or grottos, into some of which, 
 human beings might find entrance, while 
 others appeared of no larger dimensions 
 than the tombs of the Sacred Birds round 
 Lake Moeris. 
 
 I was still, I observed, but half-way up 
 the ascent to the summit, nor could per- 
 ceive any further means of continuing 
 my course, as the mountain from hence 
 rose, almost perpendicularly, like a wall. 
 At length, however, on exploring around, 
 I discovered behind the shade of a fig-
<#PG# 242>

 
 
 tree a large ladder of wood, resting firmly 
 against the rock, and affording an easy 
 and secure ascent up the steep. 
 
 Having ascertained thus far, I again 
 descended to the boat for Alethe, — 
 whom I found trembling already at her 
 short soHtude, — and having led her up 
 the steps to this quiet garden, left her 
 safely lodged, amid its holy silence, while I 
 pursued my way upward to the light on 
 the rock. 
 
 At the top of the long ladder I found 
 myself on another ledge or platform, 
 somewhat smaller than the first, but 
 planted in the same manner, with trees, 
 and, as I could perceive by the mingled 
 light of morning and the moon, embel- 
 lished with flowers. I was now near the 
 summit ; — there remained but another 
 short ascent, and, as a ladder against the 
 rock, as before, supplied the means of 
 scaling it, I was in a few minutes at the 
 opening from which the light issued. 
 I had ascended gently, as well from
<#PG# 243>

 
 
 a feeling of awe at the whole scene, as 
 from an unwillingness to disturb rudely 
 the rites on which I intruded. My ap- 
 proach was, therefore, unheard, and an 
 opportunity, during some moments, af- 
 forded me of observing the group within, 
 before my appearance at the window was 
 discovered. 
 
 In the middle of the apartment, which 
 
 seemed once to have been a Pagan oratory, 
 
 there was an assembly of seven or eight 
 
 persons, some male, some female, kneeling 
 
 in silence round a small altar; — while, 
 
 among them, as if presiding over their 
 
 ceremony, stood an aged man, who, at 
 
 the moment of my arrival, was presentmg 
 
 to one of the female worshippers an 
 
 alabaster cup, which she applied, with 
 
 much reverence, to her lips. On the 
 
 countenance of the venerable minister, 
 
 as he pronounced a short prayer over 
 
 her head, there was an expression of 
 
 profound feeling that showed how wholly 
 
 he was absorbed in that rite ; and when
<#PG# 244>

 
 
 she had drank of the cup, — which I saw 
 had engraven on its side the image of a 
 head, with a glory round it, — the holy 
 man bent dowii and kissed her forehead. 
 
 After this parting salutation, the whole 
 group rose silently from their knees ; 
 and it was then, for the first time, that, by 
 a cry of terror from one of the women, 
 the appearance of a stranger at the win- 
 dow was discovered. The whole assembly 
 seemed startled and alarmed, except him, 
 that superior person, who, advancing fi'om 
 the altar, with an unmoved look, raised the 
 latch of the door adjoining to the window, 
 and admitted me. ■' 
 
 There was, in this old man's features, 
 a mixture of elevation and sweetness, of 
 simplicity and energy, which commanded 
 at once attachment and homage ; and half 
 hoping, half fearing to find in him the 
 destined guardian of Alethe, I looked 
 anxiously in his face, as I entered, and 
 pronounced the name " Melanius ! " " Me- 
 lanius is my name, young stranger," he
<#PG# 245>

 
 
 answered ; " and whether in friendship or 
 in enmity thou comest, Melanius blesses 
 thee." Thus saying, he made a sign with 
 his right hand above my head, while, with 
 involuntary respect, I bowed beneath the 
 benediction. 
 
 " Let this volume," I replied, " answer 
 for the peacefulness of my mission," — at 
 the same time, placing in his hands the 
 copy of the Scriptures, which had been 
 his own gift to the mother of Alethe, 
 and which her child now brought as the 
 credential of her claims on his protection. 
 At the sight of this sacred pledge, which he 
 recognized instantly, the solemnity that had 
 marked his first reception of me softened 
 into tenderness. Thoughts of other times 
 appeared to pass through his mind, and as, 
 with a sigh of recollection, he took the book 
 from my hands, some words on the outer 
 leaf caught his eye. They were few, — but 
 contained, perhaps, the last wishes of the 
 dying Theora, for as he eagerly read them 
 over, I saw the tears in his aged eyes.
<#PG# 246>

 
 
 " The trust," he said, with a faltering 
 voice, " is sacred, and God will, I hope, 
 enable his servant to guard it faithfully." 
 
 During this short dialogue, the other 
 persons of the assembly had departed — 
 being, as I afterwards learned, brethren 
 from the neighbouring bank of the Nile, 
 who came thus secretly before day-break, 
 to join in worshipping their God. Fearful 
 lest their descent down the rock might 
 alarm Alethe, I hurried briefly over the few 
 words of explanation that remained, and 
 leaving the venerable Christian to follow 
 at his leisure, hastened anxiously down to 
 rejoin the maiden.
<#PG# 247>

 
 
 CHAP. XVI. 
 
 Melanius was among the first of those 
 Christians of Egypt, who, after the recent 
 example of the hermit, Paul, renouncing 
 all the comforts of social existence, be- 
 took themselves to a life of contempla- 
 tion in the desert. Less selfish, however, 
 in his piety, than most of these ascetics, 
 Melanius forgot not the world, in leaving 
 it. He knew that man was not born 
 to live wholly for himself; that his re- 
 lation to human kind was that of the 
 link to the chain, and that even his so- 
 litude should be turned to the advantage 
 of others. In flying, therefore, from the 
 din and disturbance of life, he sought not 
 to place himself beyond the reach of its 
 sympathies, but selected a retreat where 
 he could combine the advantage of soli-
<#PG# 248>

 
 
 tude with those opportunities of serving 
 his fellow-men, which a neighbourhood to 
 their populous haunts would aiford. 
 
 That taste for the gloom of subterra- 
 nean recesses, which the race of Misraim 
 inherit from their Ethiopian ancestors, 
 had, by hollowing out all Egypt into 
 caverns and crypts, furnished these Chris- 
 tian anchorets with a choice of retreats. 
 Accordingly, some found a shelter in the 
 grottos of Elethya ; — others, among 
 the royal tombs of the Thebaid. In 
 the middle of the Seven Valleys, where 
 the sun rarely shines, a few have fixed 
 their dim and melancholy retreat, while 
 others have sought the neighbourhood 
 of the red Lakes of Nitria, and there, 
 like those Pagan solitaries of old, who had 
 their dwelling among the palm-trees near 
 the Dead Sea, — muse amid the sterility 
 of nature, and seem to find, in her deso- 
 lation, peace. 
 
 It was on one of the mountains of 
 the Said, to the east of the river, that
<#PG# 249>

 
 
 Melanius, as we have seen, chose his 
 place of seclusion, — with all the life and 
 fertility of the Nile on one side, and the 
 lone, dismal barrenness of the desert on 
 the other. Half-way down this mountain, 
 where it impends over the ravine, he 
 found a series of caves or grottos dug out 
 of the rock, which had, in other times, 
 ministered to some purpose of mystery, 
 but whose use had been long forgotten, 
 and their recesses abandoned. 
 
 To this place, after the banishment of 
 his great master, Origen, Melanius, with a 
 few faithful followers, retired, and, by the 
 example of his innocent life, no less than 
 by his fervid eloquence, succeeded in 
 winning crowds of converts to his faith. 
 Placed, as he was, in the neighbourhood 
 of the rich city, Antinoc, though he 
 mingled not with its multitude, his name 
 and his fame were among them, and, to 
 all who souirht instruction or consolation, 
 the cell of the hermit was ever open. 
 
 Notwithstanding the rigid abstinence of
<#PG# 250>

 
 
 his own habits, he was yet careful to pro- 
 vide for the comforts of others. Con- 
 tented with a rude bed of straw, him- 
 self, for the stranger he had always a less 
 homely resting-place. From his grotto, 
 the wayfaring and the indigent never went 
 unrefreshed ; and, with the assistance of 
 some of his brethren, he had formed 
 gardens along the ledges of the mountain, 
 which gave an air of cheerfulness to his 
 rocky dwelling, and supplied him with the 
 chief necessaries of such a climate, fruit 
 and shade. 
 
 Though the acquaintance which he had 
 formed with the mother of Alethe, during 
 the short period of her attendance at the 
 school of Origen, was soon interrupted, 
 and never afterwards renewed, the interest 
 whicli*he had then taken in her fate was 
 too lively to be forgotten. He had seen 
 the zeal with which her young heart 
 welcomed instruction ; and the thought 
 that such a candidate for heaven should 
 have relapsed into idolatry, came often,
<#PG# 251>

 
 
 with disquieting apprehension, over his 
 mincL 
 
 It was, therefore, with true pleasure, 
 that, but a year or two before Tlieora's 
 death, he had learned from her, by a pri- 
 vate communication, transmitted through a 
 Christian embalmer of Memphis, that "not 
 only her own heart had taken root in the 
 faith, but that a new bud had flowered 
 with the same divine hope, and that, ere 
 long, he might see them both transplanted 
 to the desert." 
 
 The coming, therefore, of Alethe was 
 far less a surprise to him, than her coming 
 thus alone was a shock and a sorrow ; 
 and the silence of their meeting showed 
 how deeply each remembered that the 
 tie which had brought them together was 
 no longer of this world, — that the hand, 
 which should have been joined with theirs, 
 was in the tomb. I now saw that not even 
 religion was proof against the sadness of 
 mortality. For, as the old man put the 
 ringlets aside from her forehead, and con-
<#PG# 252>

 
 
 templated in that clear countenance the 
 reflection of what her mother had been, 
 there was a mournfulness mingled with 
 his piety, as he said, " Heaven rest her 
 soul ! " which showed how little even the 
 certainty of a heaven for those we love can 
 subdue our regret for having lost them on 
 earth. 
 
 The full light of day had now risen 
 upon the desert, and our host, reminded, 
 by the faint looks of Alethe, of the many 
 anxious hours we had passed without sleep, 
 proposed that we should seek, in the 
 chambers of the rock, such rest as the 
 dwelling of a hermit could offer. Pointing 
 to one of the largest openings, as he ad- 
 dressed me, — " Thou wilt find," he said, 
 " in that grotto a bed of fresh doum leaves, 
 and may the consciousness of having pro- 
 tected the orphan sweeten thy sleep ! " 
 
 I felt how dearly this praise had been 
 earned, and already almost repented of 
 having deserved it. There was a sadness 
 in the countenance of Alethe, as I took 
 
 M
<#PG# 253>

 
 
 leave of her, to which the forebodings of 
 my own heart but too faithfully responded ; 
 nor could I help fearing, as her hand 
 parted lingeringly from mine, that I had, 
 by this sacrifice, placed her beyond my 
 reach for ever. 
 
 Having lighted me a lamp, which, in 
 these recesses, even at noon, is necessary, 
 the holy man led me to the entrance of 
 the grotto. And here, I blush to say, my 
 career of hypocrisy began. With the sole 
 view of obtaining another glance at Alethe, 
 I turned humbly to solicit the benediction 
 of the Christian, and, having conveyed to 
 her, as I bent reverently down, as much 
 of the deep feeling of my soul as looks 
 could express, with a desponding spirit 
 I hurried into the cavern. 
 
 A short passage led me to the chamber 
 within, — the w'alls of which I found cover- 
 ed, like those of the grottos of Lycopolis, 
 with paintings, which, though executed 
 long ages airo, looked as fresh as if their 
 colours were but laid on yesterday. They 
 were, all of them, representations of rural
<#PG# 254>

 
 
 and domestic scenes ; and, in the greater 
 number, the melancholy imagination of 
 the artist had called Death in, as usual, to 
 throw his shadow over the picture. 
 
 My attention was particularly drawn to 
 one series of subjects, throughout the whole 
 of which the same group — a youth, a 
 maiden, and two aged persons, who ap- 
 peared to be the father and mother of the 
 girl, — were represented in all the details 
 of their daily life. The looks and atti- 
 tudes of the young people denoted that 
 they were lovers ; and, sometimes, they 
 were seen sitting under a canopy of 
 flowers, with their eyes fixed on each 
 other's faces, as though they could never 
 look away; sometimes, they appeared 
 walking along the banks of the Nile, 
 
 on one of those sweet nights 
 
 When Isis, the pure star of lovers, hghts 
 Her bridal crescent o'er the holy stream, — 
 When wandering youths and maidens watch her 
 
 beam. 
 And number o'er the nights she hath to run. 
 Ere she again embrace her bridegroom sun, 
 
 M 2
<#PG# 255>

 
 
 Through all these scenes of endearment 
 the two elder persons stood by ; — their 
 calm countenances touched with a share 
 of that bliss, in whose perfect light the 
 young lovers were basking. Thus far, all 
 was happiness, — but the sad lesson of 
 mortality was to come. In the last picture 
 of the series, one of the figures was missing. 
 It was that of the young maiden, who had 
 disappeared from among them. On the 
 brink of a dark lake stood the three who 
 remained ; while a boat, just departing for 
 the City of the Dead, told too plamly the 
 end of their dream of happiness. 
 
 This memorial of a sorrow of other 
 times — of a sorrow, ancient as death 
 itself, — was not wanting to deepen the 
 melancholy of my mind, or to add to the 
 weight of the many bodings that pressed 
 on it. 
 
 After a night, as it seemed, of anxious 
 and unsleeping thought, I rose from my 
 bed and returned to the garden. I found 
 the Christian alone, — seated, under the
<#PG# 256>

 
 
 shade of one of his trees, at a small table, 
 with a volume imrolled before him, while 
 a beautiful antelope lay sleeping at his feet. 
 Struck forcibly by the contrast which he 
 presented to those haughty priests, whom 
 I had seen surrounded by the pomp and 
 gorgeousness of temples, " Is this, then," 
 thought I, " the faith before which the 
 world trembles — its temple the desert, its 
 treasury a book, and its High Priest the 
 solitary dweller of the rock !" 
 
 He had prepared for me a simple, but 
 hospitable, repast, of which fruits from his 
 own garden, the white bread of Olyra, 
 and the juice of the honey-cane were the 
 most costly luxuries. His manner to me 
 was even more cordial and fatherly than 
 before; but the absence of Alethe, and, 
 still more, the ominous reserve, with which 
 he not only, himself, refrained from all 
 mention of her name, but eluded the few 
 inquiries, by which I sought to lead to it, 
 seemed to confirm all the fears I had felt 
 in parting from her. 
 
 M 3
<#PG# 257>

 
 
 She had acquainted him, it was evident, 
 with the whole history of our flight. My 
 reputation as a philosopher — my desire 
 to become a Christian — all was already 
 known to the zealous Anchoret, and the 
 subject of my conversion was the very 
 first on which he entered. O pride of 
 philosophy, how wert thou then humbled, 
 and with what shame did I stand, casting 
 down my eyes, before that venerable man, 
 as, with ingenuous trust in the sincerity of 
 my intention, he welcomed me to a par- 
 ticipation of his holy hope, and imprinted 
 the Kiss of Charity on my infidel brow ! 
 
 Embarrassed as I could not but feel by 
 the consciousness of hypocrisy, I was even 
 still more perplexed by my entire ignorance 
 of the real tenets of the faith to which I 
 professed myself a convert. Abashed and 
 confused, and with a heart sick at its own 
 deceit, I heard the animated and eloquent 
 gratulations of the Christian, as though 
 they were words in a dream, without link 
 or meaning ; nor could disguise but by the
<#PG# 258>

 
 
 mockery of a reverential bow, at every 
 pause, the total want of self-possession, 
 and even of speech, under which I la- 
 boured. 
 
 A few minutes more of such trial, and 
 I must have avowed my imposture. But 
 the holy man saw my embarrassment; 
 — and, whether mistaking it for awe, or 
 knowing it to be ignorance, relieved me 
 from my perplexity by, at once, changing 
 the theme. Having gently awakened his 
 antelope from its sleep, "You have heard," 
 he said, " I doubt not, of my brother- 
 anchoret, Paul, who, from his cave in 
 the marble mountains, near the Red Sea, 
 sends hourly ' the sacrifice of thanksgiving* 
 to heaven. Of his walks, they tell me, a 
 lion is the companion ; but, for me," he 
 added, with a playful and significant smile, 
 " who try my powers of taming but on the 
 gentler animals, this feeble child of the 
 desert is a far fitter play-mate." Then, 
 taking his staff, and putting the time-worn 
 M 4
<#PG# 259>

 
 
 volume which he had been reading into 
 a large goat-skin pouch, that hung by his 
 side, " I will now," said he, " lead thee 
 over my rocky kingdom, — that thou 
 mayst see in what drear and barren places, 
 tliat ' fruit of the spirit,' Peace, may be 
 gathered." 
 
 To speak of peace to a heart like mine, 
 at that moment, was like talking of some 
 distant harbour to the mariner fast sinking 
 at sea. In vain did I look round for some 
 sign of Alethe ; — in vain make an effort 
 even to utter her name. Consciousness 
 of my own deceit, as well as a fear of 
 awakening in Melanius any suspicion that 
 might frustrate my only hope, threw a 
 fetter over my spirit and checked my 
 tongue. In silence, therefore, I followed, 
 while the cheerful old man, with slow, 
 but firm, step, ascended the rock, by the 
 same ladders which I had mounted on the 
 preceding night. 
 
 During the time when the Decian Per- 
 secution was raging, many Christians of
<#PG# 260>

 
 
 this neighbourhood, he informed me, had 
 taken refuge under his protection, in these 
 grottos ; and the small chapel on the sum- 
 mit, where I had found them at prayer, was, 
 in those times of danger, their place of re- 
 treat, where, by drawing up these ladders, 
 they were enabled to secure themselves 
 fi'om pursuit. 
 
 From the top of the rock, the view, on 
 either side, embraced the two extremes of 
 fertility and desolation ; nor could the 
 Epicurean and the Anchoret, who now 
 gazed from that height, be at any loss to in- 
 dulge their respective tastes, between that 
 living luxuriance of the world on one side, 
 and the dead repose of the desert on the 
 other. When we turned to the river, what 
 a picture of animation presented itself! 
 Near us, to the south, were the graceful 
 colonnades of Antinoe, its proud, populous 
 streets, and triumphal monuments. On the 
 opposite shore, rich plains, teeming with 
 cultivation to the water's edge, offered up, 
 M 5
<#PG# 261>

 
 
 as from verdant altars, their fruits to the 
 sun ; while, beneath us, the Nile, r 
 
 the glorious stream, 
 
 That late between its banks was seen to glide, — 
 With shrines and marble cities, on each side, 
 Glittering, like jewels strung along a chain, — 
 Had now sent forth its waters, and o'er plain 
 And valley, like a giant from his bed 
 Rising with outstretch'd limbs, superbly spread. 
 
 From this scene, on one side of the moun- 
 tain, we had but to turn round our eyes to 
 the other, and it was as if Nature herself 
 had become suddenly extinct ; — a wide 
 waste of sands, bleak and interminable, 
 wearying out the sun with its sameness of 
 desolation ; — black, burnt-up rocks, that 
 stood as barriers, at which life stopped ; — 
 while the only signs of animation, past or 
 present, were the foot-prints, here and 
 there, of an antelope or ostrich, or the 
 bones of dead camels, as they lay whitening 
 at a distance, marking out the track of the 
 caravans over the waste.
<#PG# 262>

 
 
 After listening, while he contrasted, in 
 a few eloquent words, the two regions of 
 life and death on whose confines we stood, 
 I again descended with my guide to the 
 garden we had left. From thence, turn- 
 ing into a path along the mountain-side, 
 he conducted me to another row of grottos, 
 facing the desert, which had once, he said, 
 been the abode of those brethren in Christ, 
 who had fled with him to this solitude 
 from the crowded world, — but which 
 death had, within, a few months,! rendered 
 tenantless. A cross of red stone, and a 
 few faded trees, were the only traces these 
 solitaries had left behind. 
 
 A silence of some minutes succeeded, 
 while we descended to the edge of the 
 canal ; and I saw opposite, among the 
 rocks, that solitary cave, which had so 
 chilled me with its aspect on the pre- 
 ceding night. By the bank we found one 
 of those rustic boats, which the Egyptians 
 construct of planks of wild thorn, bound 
 rudely together with bands of papyrus. 
 M 6
<#PG# 263>

 
 
 Placing ourselves in this boat, and rather 
 impelling than rowing it across, we made 
 our way through the foul and shallow 
 flood, and landed directly under the site 
 of the cave. 
 
 This dwelling, as I have already men- 
 tioned, was situated upon a ledge of the 
 rock ; and, being provided witli a sort of 
 window or aperture to admit the light of 
 heaven, was accounted, I found, more 
 cheerful than the grottos on the other 
 side of the ravine. But there was a 
 dreariness in the whole region around, to 
 which light only lent more horror. The 
 dead whiteness of the rocks, as they stood, 
 like ghosts, in the sunshine; — that melan- 
 choly pool, half lost in tlie sands ; — all 
 gave me the idea of a wasting world. 
 To dwell in such a place seemed to me 
 like a living death ; and when the Chris- 
 tian, as we entered the cave, said, " Here 
 is to be thy home," prepared as I had been 
 for the worst, my resolution gave way ; 
 — every feeling of disappointed passion
<#PG# 264>

 
 
 and humbled pride, which had been ga- 
 thering round my heart for the last few 
 hours, found a vent at once, and I burst 
 into tears ! 
 
 Well accustomed to human weakness, 
 and perhaps guessing at some of the 
 sources of mine, the good Hermit, with- 
 out appearing to notice this emotion, ex- 
 patiated, with a cheerful air, on, what he 
 called, the many comforts of my dwelling. 
 Sheltered, he said, from the dry, burning 
 wind of the south, my porch would inhale 
 the fresh breeze of the Dog-star. Fruits 
 from his own mountain-garden should 
 furnish my repast. The well of the neigh- 
 bouring rock would supply my beverage ; 
 and, " here," he continued, — lowering his 
 voice into a more solemn tone, as he 
 placed upon the table the volume which he 
 had brought, — " here, my son, is that 
 ' well of living waters,* in which alone 
 thou wilt find lasting refreshment or 
 peace ! " Thus saying, he descended
<#PG# 265>

 
 
 the rock to his boat, and after a few 
 plashes of his oar had died upon my ear, 
 the solitude and silence that reigned 
 around was complete.
<#PG# 266>

 
 
 CHAP. XVII. 
 
 "What a fate was mine ! — but a few 
 weeks since, presiding over that splendid 
 Festival of the Garden, with all the luxu- 
 ries of existence tributary in my train; 
 and now, — self-humbled into a solitary 
 outcast, — the hypocritical pupil of a 
 Christian anchoret, — without even the ex- 
 cuse of fanaticism, or of any other mad- 
 ness, but that of love, wild love, to exte- 
 nuate my fall ! Were there a hope that, 
 by this humiliating waste of existence, I 
 might purchase but a glimpse, now and 
 then, of Alethe, even the depths of the 
 desert, with such a chance, would be wel- 
 come. But to live — and live thus — 
 ixitliout her, was a misery which I neither 
 foresaw nor could endure. 
 
 Hating even to look upon the den to 
 which I was doomed, I hurried out into
<#PG# 267>

 
 
 the air, and found my way, along the 
 rocks, to the desert. The sun was going 
 down, with that blood-red hue, which he 
 so frequently wears, in this clime, at his 
 setting. I saw the sands, stretching out, 
 like a sea, to the horizon, as if their waste 
 extended to the very verge of the world, — 
 and, in the bitterness of my feelings, re- 
 joiced to see so much of creation rescued, 
 even by this barren liberty, from the grasp 
 of man. The thought seemed to relieve 
 my wounded pride, and, as I wandered 
 over the dim and boundless solitude, to 
 be thus free, even amid blight and desola- 
 tion, appeared a blessing. 
 
 The only living thing I saw was a rest- 
 less swallow, whose wings were of the hue 
 of the grey sands over which he fluttered. 
 " Why (thought I) may not the mind, like 
 this bird, take the colour of the desert, 
 and sympathise in its austerity, its freedom, 
 and its calm ? — thus vainly endeavouring, 
 between despondence and defiance, to en- 
 counter with fortitude what yet my heart
<#PG# 268>

 
 
 sickened to contemplate. But the effort 
 was unavailing. Overcome by that vast 
 solitude, whose repose was not the slumber 
 of peace, but rather the sullen and burning 
 silence of hate, 1 felt my spirit give way, 
 and even love itself yield to despair. 
 
 Seating myself on a fragment of a rock, 
 and covering my eyes with my hands, I 
 made an effort to shut out the overwhelm- 
 ing prospect. But in vain — it was still 
 before me, deepened by all that fancy 
 could add; and when, again looking 
 up, I saw the last red ray of the sun, 
 shooting across that melancholy and life- 
 less waste, it seemed to me like the light of 
 that comet which once desolated this world, 
 shining out luridly over the ruin that it 
 had made ! 
 
 Appalled by my own gloomy imagin- 
 ations, I turned towards the ravine ; and, 
 notwithstanding the disgust with which I 
 had left my dwelling, was not ill pleased 
 to find my way, over the rocks, to it again. 
 On approaching the cave, to my astonish-
<#PG# 269>

 
 
 ment, I saw a light within. At such a 
 moment, any vestige of hfe was welcome, 
 and I hailed the unexpected appearance 
 with pleasure. On entering, however, I 
 found tlie chamber as lonely as I had left 
 it. The light came from a lamp that 
 burned brightly on the table ; beside it 
 was unfolded the volume which Melanius 
 had brought, and upon the leaves — oh, 
 joy and surprise — lay the well-known 
 cross of Alethe ! 
 
 What hand, but her own, could have 
 prepared this reception for me ? — Tlie 
 very thought sent a hope into my heart, 
 before which ail despondency fled. Even 
 the gloom of the desert was forgotten, and 
 my cave at once brightened into a bower. 
 She had here reminded me, herself, by 
 this sacred memorial, of the vow which I 
 had pledged to her under the Hermit's 
 rock ; and I now scrupled not to reiterate 
 the same daring promise, though con- 
 scious that through hypocrisy alone I 
 could fulfil it.
<#PG# 270>

 
 
 Eager to prepare myself for my task 
 of imposture, I sat down to the volume, 
 which I now found to be the Hebrew 
 Scriptures ; and the first sentence, on 
 which my eyes fell, was — " The Lord 
 hath commanded the blessing, even Life 
 for evermore ! " Startled by these words, in 
 which it seemed to me as if the Spirit of my 
 dream had again pronounced his assuring 
 prediction, I raised my eyes from the page, 
 and repeated the sentence over and over, as 
 if to try whether the sounds had any charm 
 or spell, to reawaken that faded illusion in 
 my soul. But, no — the rank frauds of the 
 Memphian priesthood had dispelled all my 
 trust in the promises of religion. My heart 
 had again relapsed into its gloom of scep- 
 ticism, and, to the word of " Life," the 
 only answer it sent back was, "Death !" 
 
 Impatient, however, to possess myself of 
 the elements of a faith, on which, — what- 
 ever it might promise for hereafter, — I felt 
 that my happiness here depended, I turned 
 over the pages with an earnestness and
<#PG# 271>

 
 
 avidity, such as never even the most fa- 
 vourite of my studies had awakened in me. 
 Though, like all who seek but the surface 
 of learning, I flew desultorily over the 
 leaves, lighting only on the more promi- 
 nent and shining points, I yet found 
 myself, even in this undisciplined career, 
 arrested, at every page, by the awful, the 
 supernatural sublimity, the alternate me- 
 lancholy and grandeur of the images that 
 crowded upon me. 
 
 I had, till now, known the Hebrew 
 theology but through the platonising re- 
 finements of Philo ; — as, in like manner, 
 for my knowledge of the Christian doc- 
 trine I was indebted to my brother Epi- 
 cureans, Lucian and Celsus. Little, 
 therefore, was I prepared for the simple 
 majesty, the high tone of inspiration, — 
 the poetry, in short, of heaven, that 
 breathed throughout these oracles. Could 
 admiration have kindled faith, I should, 
 that night, have been a believer; so ele- 
 vated, so awed was my imagination by
<#PG# 272>

 
 
 that wonderful book, — its warnings of 
 wo, its announcements of glory, and its un- 
 rivalled strains of adoration and sorrow. 
 
 Hovu* after hour, with the same eager 
 and desultory curiosity, did I turn over 
 the leaves; — and when, at length, I lay 
 down to rest, my fancy was still haunted 
 by the impressions it had received. I went 
 again through the various scenes of which 
 I had read; again called up, in sleep, the 
 bright images that had charmed me, and, 
 when wakened at day-break by the Hymn 
 from the chapel, fancied myself still listen- 
 ing to the sound of the winds, sighing 
 mournfully through the harps of Israel 
 on the willows. 
 
 Starting from my bed, I hurried out 
 upon the rock, with a hope that, among 
 the tones of that morning choir, I might 
 be able to distinguish the sweet voice of 
 Alethe. But the strain had ceased;^! 
 caught only the last notes of the Hymn, 
 as, echoing up that lonely valley, they, 
 died away into the silence of the desert.
<#PG# 273>

 
 
 With the first ghmpse of light I was 
 again at my study, and, notwithstanding the 
 distraction both of my thoughts and looks 
 towards the distant, half-seen grottos of the 
 Anchoret, pursued it with unabating perse- 
 verance through the day. Still alive, how- 
 ever, but to the elo(|uence, the poetry of 
 what I read, of its connection or authenti- 
 city, as a history, I never paused to con- 
 sider. My fancy being alone interested by 
 it, to fancy I referred all it contained ; and, 
 passing rapidly from annals to prophecy, 
 from narration to song, regarded the whole 
 but as a tissue of splendid allegories, in 
 which the melancholy of Egyptian associ- 
 ations was interwoven with the rich imagery 
 of the East. 
 
 Towards sunset I saw the boat of Me- 
 lanius on its way, across the canal, to my 
 cave. Though he had no other companion 
 than his graceful antelope, that stood snuff- 
 ing the wild air of the desert, as if scent- 
 ing its home, I felt his visit, even thus, 
 to be a most welcome relief. It was the
<#PG# 274>

 
 
 hour, he said, of his evening ramble up 
 the mountain, — of his accustomed visit to 
 those cisterns of the rock, from which he 
 nightly drew his most precious beverage. 
 While he spoke, I observed in his hand 
 one of those earthen cups, in which the 
 inhabitants of the wilderness are accus- 
 tomed to collect the fresh dew among the 
 rocks. Having proposed that I should ac- 
 company him in his walk, he led me, in the 
 direction of the desert, up the side of the 
 mountain that rose above my dwelling, and 
 which formed the southern wall or screen 
 of the defile. 
 
 Near the summit we found a seat, where 
 the old man paused to rest. It commanded 
 a full view over the desert, and was by the 
 side of one of those hollows in the rock, 
 those natural reservoirs, in which the dews 
 of night are treasured up for the refresh- 
 ment of the dwellers in the wilderness. 
 Having learned from me how far I had 
 proceeded in my study, "In that light," said 
 he, pointing to a small cloud in the east,
<#PG# 275>

 
 
 wliicli had been formed on the horizon by 
 the haze of tlie desert, and was now faintly 
 reflecting the splendours of sunset, — " in 
 that light stands Mount Sinai, of whose 
 glory thou hast read ; on whose summit 
 was the scene of one of those awful reve- 
 lations, in which the Almighty has, from 
 time to time, renewed his communication 
 with Man, and kept alive the remem- 
 brance of his own Providence in this 
 world." 
 
 After a pause, as if absorbed in the 
 immensity of the subject, the holy man 
 continued his sublime theme. Looking 
 back to the earliest annals of time, he 
 showed how constantly every relapse of 
 the human race into idolatry has been 
 followed by some manifestation of divine 
 power, chastening the proud by punish- 
 ment, and winning back the humble by 
 love. It was to preserve, he said, unex- 
 tinguished upon earth, that vital truth, — 
 the Creation of the world by one Supreme 
 Being, — that God chose, from among the
<#PG# 276>

 
 
 nations, an humble and enslaved race ; — 
 that he brought them out of their captivity 
 " on eagles' wings," and, surrounding 
 every step of their course with miracles, 
 placed them before the eyes of all succeed- 
 ing generations, as the depositaries of his 
 will, and the ever-during memorials of 
 his power. 
 
 Passing, then, in review the long train 
 of inspired interpreters, whose pens and 
 whose tongues were made the echoes of 
 the Divine voice, he traced *, through the 
 events of successive ages, the gradual un- 
 folding of the dark scheme of Providence 
 
 — darkness without, but all light and glory 
 within. The glimpses of a coming redemp- 
 tion, visible even through the wrath of 
 Heaven ; — the long series of prophecy 
 through which this hope runs, burning 
 and alive, like a spark through a chain ; 
 
 — the merciful preparation of the hearts 
 of mankind for the great trial of their 
 
 * In the original, the discourses of the Hermit 
 are given much more at length.
<#PG# 277>

 
 
 faith and obedience that was at hand, not 
 only by miracles that appealed to the 
 living, but by predictions launched into 
 futurity to carry conviction to the yet 
 unborn ; — " through all these glorious 
 and beneficent gradations we may track," 
 said he, " the manifest footsteps of a 
 Creatoi-, advancing to his grand, ultimate 
 end, the salvation of his creatures." 
 
 After some hours devoted to these holy 
 instructions, we returned to the ravine, 
 and Melanius left me at my cave ; praying, 
 as he parted from me, — with a benevo- 
 lence I but ill, alas ! deserved, — that my 
 soul, under these lessons, might be " as a 
 watered garden," and, ere long, bear 
 " fruit unto life eternal." 
 
 Next morning, I was again at my study, 
 and even more eager in the task than be- 
 fore. With the commentary of the Her- 
 mit freshly in my memory, I again read 
 through, with attention, the Book of the 
 Law. But in vain did I seek the promise 
 of immortality in its pages. " It tells me,V
<#PG# 278>

 
 
 said I, " of a God coming down to earth, 
 but of the ascent of Man to heaven it 
 speaks not. The rewards, the punish- 
 ments it announces, lie all on this side of 
 the grave ; nor did even the Omnipotent 
 offer to his own chosen servants a hope 
 beyond the impassable limits of this v/orld. 
 Where, then, is the salvation of which 
 the Christian spoke ? or, if Dea*^^^ be at 
 the root of the faith, can Life sprmg out 
 of it ! " 
 
 Again, in the bitterness of disappoint- 
 ment, did I mock at my own willing self- 
 delusion, — again rail at the arts of that 
 traitress, Fancy, ever ready, like the De- 
 lilah of this book, to steal u[jon the slum- 
 bers of Reason, and deliver him up, shorn 
 and powerless, to his foes. If deception — 
 tliought I, with a sigh — be necessary, at 
 least let me not practise it on myself; — 
 in the desperate alternative before me, let 
 me rather be even hypocrite than dupe. 
 
 These self-accusing reflections, cheer- 
 N 2
<#PG# 279>

 
 
 less as they rendered my task, did not 
 abate, for a single moment, my industry in 
 pursuing it. I read on and on, with a sort 
 of sullen apathy, neither charmed by style, 
 nor transported by imagery, — that fatal 
 blight in my heart having communicated 
 itself to my fancy and taste. The curses 
 and the blessings, the glory and the ruin, 
 which the historian recorded and the pro- 
 phet predicted, seemed all of this world, 
 — all temporal and earthl3\ That mor- 
 tality, of which the fountain-head had 
 tasted, tinged the whole stream ; and when 
 I read the words, " all are of the dust, 
 and all turn to dust again," a feeling, like 
 the wind of the desert, came witheringly 
 over me. Love, Beauty, Glory, every 
 thing most bright upon earth, appeared 
 sinking before my eyes, under this dread- 
 ful doom, into one general mass of cor- 
 ruption and silence. 
 
 Possessed by the image of desolation I 
 had called up, I laid my head on the book, 
 in a paroxysm of despair. Death, in all
<#PG# 280>

 
 
 his most ghastly varieties, passed before 
 me ; and I had continued thus for some 
 time, as under the influence of a fearful 
 vision, when the touch of a hand upon my 
 shoulder roused me. Looking up, I saw 
 the Anchoret standing by my side ; — his 
 countenance beaming with that sublime 
 tranquillity, which a hope, beyond this 
 earth, alone can bestow. How I envied 
 him ! 
 
 We again took our way to the seat upon 
 the mountain, — the gloom in my own 
 mind making every thing around me more 
 gloomy. Forgettmg my hypocrisy in my 
 feelings, I, at once, made an avowal to him 
 of all the doubts and fears which my study 
 of the morning had awakened. 
 
 " Thou art yet, my son," he answered, 
 " but on the threshold of our faith. Thou 
 hast seen but the first rudiments of the 
 Divine plan ; — its full and consummate 
 perfection hath not yet opened upon thee. 
 However glorious that manifestation of 
 Divinity on Mount Sinai, it was but the 
 
 N 3
<#PG# 281>

 
 
 forerunner of another, still more glorious, 
 that, in the fulness of time, was to burst 
 upon the world ; when all, that had seemed 
 dim and incomplete, was to be perfected, 
 and the promises, shadowed out by the 
 ' spirit of prophecy,' realised ; — when the 
 silence, that lay, as a seal, on the future, 
 was to be broken, and the glad tidings 
 of life and immortality proclaimed to the 
 world ! " 
 
 Observing my features brighten at these 
 words, the pious man continued. Anticipat- 
 ing some of the holy knowledge that was 
 in store for me, he traced, through all its 
 wonders and mercies, the great work of 
 Redemption, dwelling on every miraculous 
 cuxumstance connected with it ; — the 
 exalted nature of the Being, by whose 
 ministiy it was accomplished, the noblest 
 and first created of the Sons of God, 
 inferior only to the one, self-existent 
 Father; — the mysterious incarnation of 
 this heavenly messenger ; — the miracles 
 that authenticated his divine mission ; —
<#PG# 282>

 
 
 the example of obedience to God and 
 love to man, which he set, as a shining 
 light, before the world for ever ; — and, 
 lastly and chiefly, his death and resur- 
 rection, by which the covenant of mercy 
 was sealed, and " life and immortality 
 brought to light." 
 
 " Such," continued the Hermit, " was 
 the Mediator, promised through all time, 
 to ' make reconciliation for iniquity,' to 
 change death into life, and bring ' heal- 
 ing on his wings ' to a darkened world. 
 Such was the last crowning dispensation 
 of that God of benevolence, in whose 
 hands sin and death are but instruments 
 of everlasting good, and who, through 
 apparent evil and temporary retribution, 
 bringing all things ' out of darkness into 
 his marvellous light,' proceeds watchfully 
 and unchangingly to the great, final object 
 of his providence, — the restoration of the 
 whole human race to purity and happi- 
 ness ! " 
 
 With a mind astonished, if not touched, 
 N 4
<#PG# 283>

 
 
 by these discourses, I returned to my cave; 
 and found the lamp, as before, ready 
 lighted to receive me. Tlie volume which I 
 had been reading was replaced by another, 
 which lay open upon the table, with a 
 branch of fresh palm between its leaves. 
 Though I could not have a doubt to whose 
 gentle hand I was indebted for this in- 
 visible superintendence over my studies, 
 tliere was yet a something in it, so like spi- 
 ritual interposition, that it awed me ; — and 
 never more than at this moment, when, 
 on approaching the volume, I saw, as the 
 light glistened over its silver letters, that it 
 was the very Book of Life of which the 
 Hermit had spoken ! 
 
 The orison of the Christians had sounded 
 through the valley, before I had yet raised 
 my eyes from that sacred volume ; and the 
 second hour of the sun found me again 
 over its pages.
<#PG# 284>

 
 
 CHAP. XVIII. 
 
 In this mode of existence did I pass 
 some days ; — my mornings devoted to 
 reading, my nights to listening, under the 
 wide canopy of heaven, to the holy elo- 
 quence of Melanius. The perseverance 
 with which I inquired, and the quickness 
 with which I learned, soon succeeded in 
 deceiving my benevolent instructor, who 
 mistook curiosity for zeal, and knowledge 
 for belief. Alas ! cold, and barren, and 
 earthly was that knowledge, — the word 
 without the spirit, the shape without the 
 life. Even when, as a relief from hy- 
 pocrisy, I persuaded myself that I be- 
 lieved, it was but a brief delusion, a faith, 
 whose hope crumbled at the touch, — 
 like the fruit of the desert-shrub, shinin<r 
 and empty ! 
 
 But, though my soul was still dark, the 
 N 5
<#PG# 285>

 
 
 good Hermit saw not into its depths. The 
 very facility of my belief, which might 
 have suggested some doubt of its sincerity, 
 was but regarded, by his innocent zeal, as 
 a more signal triumph of the truth. His 
 own ingenuousness led him to a ready 
 trust in others ; and the examples of such 
 conversion as that of the philosopher, 
 Justin, who, during a walk by the sea- 
 shore, received the light into his soul, had 
 prepared him for illuminations of the 
 spirit, even more rapid than mine. 
 
 Durins; all this time, I neither saw nor 
 
 '& 
 
 heard of Alethe ; — nor could my patience 
 have endured so long a privation, had not 
 those mute vestiges of her presence, that 
 welcomed me every night on my return, 
 made me feel that I was still living under 
 her gentle influence, and that her sympathy 
 hung round every step of my progress. 
 Once, too, when I ventured to speak her 
 name to Mclanius, though he answered 
 not my inquiry, there was a smile, I 
 thought, of promise upon his countenance,
<#PG# 286>

 
 
 which love, far more alive than faith, inter- 
 preted as it wished. 
 
 At length, — it was on the sixth or 
 seventh evening of my soUtude, when 1 
 lay resting at the door of my cave, after 
 the study of the day, — I was. startled by 
 hearing my name called loudly from the 
 opposite rocks ; and looking up, saw, on 
 the cliff near the deserted grottos, Me- 
 lanius and — oh ! I could not doubt — my 
 Alethe by his side ! 
 
 Though I had never ceased, since the 
 first night of my return from the desert, 
 to flatter myself with the fancy that I Was 
 still living in her presence, the actual sight 
 of her again made me feel for what an age 
 we had been separated. She was clothed 
 all in white, and, as she stood in the 
 last remains of the sunshine, appeared to 
 my too prophetic fancy like a parting 
 spirit, whose last footsteps on earth that 
 glory encircled. 
 
 With a delight only to be imagined, I 
 saw them descend the rocks, and, placing 
 
 N 6
<#PG# 287>

 
 
 themselves in the boat, proceed towards 
 my cave. To disguise from Melanius 
 the feelings with which we met was im- 
 possible ; — nor did Alethe even attempt 
 to make a secret of her innocent joy. 
 Though blushing at her own happiness, 
 she could as little conceal it, as the clear 
 waters of Ethiopia can hide their gold. 
 Every look, too, every word, spoke a ful- 
 ness of affection, to which, doubtful as I 
 was of our tenure of happiness, I knew 
 not how to answer. 
 
 I was not long, however, left ignorant 
 of the bright fate that awaited me; but, 
 as we wandered or rested amonc; the 
 rocks, learned every thing that had been 
 arranged since our parting. She had 
 made the Hermit, I found, acquainted 
 with all that had passed between us ; had 
 told him, without reserve, every incident 
 of our voyage, — the avowals, the demon- 
 strations of affection on one side, and 
 the deep sentiment that gratitude had 
 awakened on the other. Too wise to re-
<#PG# 288>

 
 
 gard feelings, so natural, with severity, — 
 knowing that they were of heaven, and 
 but made evil by man, — the good Hermit 
 had heard of our attachment with plea- 
 sure ; and, proved as he thought the 
 purity of my views had been, by the 
 fidelity with which I had delivered up my 
 trust into his hands, saw, in my affection 
 for the young orphan, but a providential 
 resource against that friendless solitude in 
 which his death must soon leave her. 
 
 As I collected these particulars from 
 their discourse, I could hardly trust my 
 ears. It seemed too much happiness to be 
 real; nor can words convey an idea of 
 the joy — the shame — the wonder with 
 which I listened, while the holy man him- 
 self declared, that he awaited but the 
 moment, when he should find me worthy 
 of becoming a member of the Christian 
 Church, to give me also the hand of Alethe 
 in that sacred union, which alone sanctifies 
 love, and makes the faith, which it pledges, 
 heavenly. It was but yesterday, he added,
<#PG# 289>

 
 
 that his young charge, herself, after a pre- 
 paration of prayer and repentance, such 
 as even her pure spirit required, had been 
 admitted, by the sacred ordinance of bap- 
 tism, into the bosom of the faith ; — and 
 the white garment she wore, and the ring 
 of gold on her finger, " were symbols," 
 he said, " of that New Life into which 
 she had been initiated." 
 
 I raised my eyes to her as he spoke, 
 but withdrew them again, dazzled and 
 confused. Even her beauty, to my ima- 
 gination, seemed to have undergone some 
 brightening change : and the contrast be- 
 tween that open and happy countenance, 
 and the unblest brow of the infidel that 
 stood before her, abashed me into a sense 
 of unworthiness, and almost checked my 
 rapture. 
 
 To that night, however, I look back, as 
 an epoch in my existence. It proved 
 that sorrow is not the only awakener of 
 devotion, but that joy may sometimes call 
 the holy spark into life. Returning to
<#PG# 290>

 
 
 my cave, with a heart full, even to oppres- 
 sion, of its happiness, I could find no other 
 relief to my overcharged feelings than that 
 of throwing myself on my knees, and, 
 for the first time in my life, uttering a 
 prayer, that if, indeed, there were a Being 
 who watched over mankind, he would 
 send down one ray of his truth into my 
 soul, and make it worthy of the blessings, 
 both here and hereafter, proffered to 
 me ! 
 
 My days now rolled on in a perfect 
 dream of happiness. Every hour of the 
 morning was welcomed as bringing nearer 
 and nearer the blest time of sunset, when 
 the Hermit and Alethe never failed to pay 
 their visit to my now charmed cave, where 
 her smile, at each parting, left a light that 
 lasted till her return. Then, our rambles, 
 by star-light, over the mountain ; — our 
 pauses, from time to time, to contemplate 
 the bright wonders of that heaven above 
 us; — our repose by the cistern of the rock; 
 and our silent listening, through hours
<#PG# 291>

 
 
 that seemed minutes, to the holy eloquence 
 of our teacher ; — all, all was happiness of 
 the most heartfelt kind, and such as even 
 the doubts, the cold, lingering doubts, that 
 still hung, like a mist, around my heart, 
 could neither cloud nor chill. 
 
 When the moonlight nights returned, 
 we used to venture into the desert; and 
 those sands, which but lately had ap- 
 peared to me so desolate, now wore even a 
 cheerful and smiling aspect. To the light, 
 innocent heart of Alethe, every thing was 
 a source of enjoyment. For her, even the 
 desert had its jewels and flowers ; and, 
 sometimes, her delight was to search 
 ainong the sands for those beautiful pebbles 
 of jasper that abound in them ; — some- 
 times, her eyes sparkled on finding, per- 
 haps, a stunted marigold, or one of those 
 bitter, scarlet flowers, that lend their mock- 
 ery of ornament to the desert. In all these 
 pursuits and pleasures the good Hermit 
 took a share, — mingling with them occa- 
 sionally the reflections of a benevolent
<#PG# 292>

 
 
 piety, that lent its own cheerful hue to all 
 the works of creation, and saw the con- 
 soling truth, " God is Love," written legibly 
 every where. 
 
 Such was, for a few weeks, my blissful 
 life. Oh mornings of hope, oh nights of 
 happiness, with what mournful pleasure do 
 I retrace your flight, and how reluctantly 
 pass to the sad events that followed ! 
 
 During this time, in compliance with the 
 wishes of Melanius, who seemed unwilling 
 thati should become wholly estranged from 
 the world, I occasionally paid a visit to the 
 neighbouring city, Antinoe, which, as the 
 capital of the Thebaid, is the centre of all 
 the luxury of Upper Egypt. Here, — so 
 changed was my every feeling by the all- 
 transforming passion that possessed me, — 
 I wandered, unamused and uninterested 
 by either the scenes or the people that 
 surrounded me, and, sighing for that rocky 
 solitude where Alethe breathed, felt this 
 to be the wilderness, and that the world. 
 
 Even the thoughts of my own native
<#PG# 293>

 
 
 Athens, that were called up, at every step, 
 by the light Grecian architecture of this 
 imperial city, did not awaken one single 
 regret in my heart — one wish to exchange 
 even an hour of my desert for the best 
 luxuries and honours that awaited me in 
 the Garden. I saw the arches of triumph ; 
 
 — I walked under the superb portico, which 
 encircles the whole city with its marble 
 shade ; — I stood in the Circus of the Sun, 
 by whose rose-coloured pillars the myste- 
 rious movements of the Nile are measured ; 
 
 — on all these bright ornaments of glory 
 and art, as well as on the gay multitude 
 that enlivened them, I looked with an un- 
 heeding eye. If they awakened in me any 
 thought, it was the mournful idea, that, 
 one day, like Thebes and Heliopolis, this 
 pageant would pass away, leaving nothing 
 behind but a few mouldering ruins, — like 
 the sea-shells found where the ocean has 
 been, — to tell that the great tide of Life 
 was once there ! 
 
 But, though indifferent thus to all that 
 had formerly attracted me, there were
<#PG# 294>

 
 
 subjects, once alien to my heart, on which 
 it was now most trembhngly ahve ; and 
 some rumours which had reached me, in 
 one of my visits to the city, of an expected 
 change in the poHcy of the Emperor to- 
 wards the Christians, filled my mind with 
 apprehensions as new as they were dread- 
 ful to me. 
 
 The peace and even favour which the 
 Christians enjoyed, during the first four 
 years of the reign of Valerian, had removed 
 from them all fear of a renewal of those 
 horrors, which they had experienced under 
 the rule of his predecessor, Decius. Of 
 late, however, some less friendly disposi- 
 tions had manifested themselves. The 
 bigots of the court, taking alarm at the 
 spread of the new faith, had succeeded in 
 fillinff the mind of the monarch with that 
 religious jealousy, which is the ever-ready 
 parent of cruelty and injustice. Among 
 these counsellors of evil was Macrianus, the 
 Praetorian Prefect, who was, by birth, an 
 Egyptian, and — so akin is superstition to
<#PG# 295>

 
 
 intolerance — had long made himself no- 
 torious by his addiction to the dark prac- 
 tices of demon-worship and magic. 
 
 From this minister, vvlio was now high 
 in the favour of Valerian, the expected 
 measures of severity against the Christians, 
 it was supposed, would emanate. All 
 tongues, in all quarters, were busy with 
 the news. In the streets, in the public 
 gardens, on the steps of the temples, I saw, 
 every where, groups of inquirers collected, 
 and heard the name of Macrianus upon 
 every tongue. It was dreadful, too, to 
 observe, in the countenances of those who 
 spoke, the variety of feeling with which 
 the rumour was discussed, according as 
 they desired or dreaded its truth, — ac- 
 cording as they were likely to be among 
 the torturers or the victims. 
 
 Alarmed, thouiih still ignorant of the 
 whole extent of the danger, I hurried back 
 to the ravine, and, going at once to the 
 grotto of Melanius, detailed to him every 
 particular of the intelligence I had col-
<#PG# 296>

 
 
 ected. He heard me with a composure, 
 which I mistook, alas ! for confidence in 
 his security ; and, naming the hour for our 
 evening walk, retired into his grotto. 
 
 At the accustomed time Alethe and he 
 were at my cave. It was evident that he 
 had not commimicated to her the intelH- 
 gence which I had brought, for never did 
 brow wear such a happiness as that which 
 now played round hers ; — it was, alas ! not 
 of this earth. Melanius, himself, though 
 composed, was thoughful ; and the solem- 
 nity, almost approaching to melancholy, 
 with w hich he placed the hand of Alethe in 
 mine — in the performance, too, of a cere- 
 mony that ought to have filled my heart 
 with joy — saddened and alarmed me. This 
 ceremony was our betrothment, — the 
 plighting of our faith to each other, — 
 which we now solemnized on the rock be- 
 fore the door of my cave, in the face of 
 that sunset heaven, whose one star stood 
 as our witness. After a blessing from the 
 Hermit on our spousal pledge, I placed
<#PG# 297>

 
 
 the ring, — the earnest of our future union, 
 — on her finger, and, in the bhisli, with 
 which she surrendered her whole heart to 
 me at that instant, forgot every thing but 
 my happiness, and feh secure, even against 
 fate! 
 
 We took our accustomed walk over the 
 rocks and on the desert. The moon was 
 so bright, — like the daylight, indeed, of 
 other climes, — that we could see plainly 
 the tracks of the wild antelopes in the 
 sand ; and it was not without a slight 
 tremble of feeling in his voice, as if some 
 melancholy analogy occurred to him as 
 he spoke, that the good Hermit said, " I 
 have observed in my walks, that where- 
 ever the track of that gentle animal ap- 
 pears, there is, almost always, the foot- 
 print of a beast of prey near it." He 
 regained, how^ever, his usual cheerfulness 
 before we parted, and fixed the following 
 evening for an excursion, on the other side 
 of the ravine, to a point, looking, he said, 
 "towards that northern region of the desert.
<#PG# 298>

 
 
 where the hosts of the Lord encamped in 
 their departure out of bondage." 
 
 Though, in the presence of Alethe, my 
 fears, even for herself, were forgotten in 
 that perpetual element of happiness, which 
 encircled her like the air that she breathed, 
 no sooner was I alone, than vague terrors 
 and bodings crowded upon me. In vain did 
 I try to reason myself out of my fears, by 
 dwellin'T on the most cheering circum- 
 stances, — on the reverence with which Me- 
 lanius was regarded, even by the Pagans, 
 and the inviolate security with which 
 he had lived through the most peril- 
 ous periods, not only safe himself, but 
 affording sanctuary in his grottos to others. 
 Though somewhat calmed by these con- 
 siderations, yet when I sunk off to sleep, 
 dark, horrible dreams took possession of 
 my mind. Scenes of death and of torment 
 passed confusedly before me, and, when I 
 awoke, it was with the fearful impression 
 that all these horrors were real.
<#PG# 299>

 
 
 CHAP. XIX. 
 
 At length, the day dawned, — that dread- 
 ful day. Impatient to be relieved from my 
 suspense, I threw myself into my boat, — 
 the same in which we had performed our 
 happy voyage, — and, as fast as oars could 
 speed me, hurried away to the city. I 
 found the suburbs silent and solitary, but, 
 as I approached the Forum, loud yells, 
 like those of barbarians in combat, struck 
 on my ear, and, when I entered it, — great 
 God, what a spectacle presented itself! 
 The imperial edict against the Christians 
 had arrived during the night, and already 
 the wild fury of bigotry was let loose. 
 
 Under a canopy, in the middle of the 
 Forum, was the tribunal of the Governor. 
 Two statues, — one of Apollo, the other of 
 Osiris, — stood at the bottom of the steps 
 that led up to his judgment-seat. Before
<#PG# 300>

 
 
 these idols were shrines, to which the 
 devoted Christians were dragged from all 
 quarters by the soldiers and mob, and there 
 compelled to recant, by throwing incense 
 into the flame, or, on their refusal, hurried 
 away to torture and death. It was an 
 appalling scene ; — the consternation, the 
 cries of some of the victims, — the pale, 
 silent resolution of others; — the fierce 
 shouts of laughter that broke from the 
 multitude, when the frankincense, dropped 
 on the altar, proclaimed some denier of 
 Christ ; and the fiend- like triumph with 
 which the courageous Confessors, who 
 avowed their faith, were led away to the 
 flames ; — never could I have conceived 
 such an assemblage of horrors ! 
 
 Though I gazed but for a few minutes, 
 in those minutes I felt enough for years. 
 Already did the form of Alethe flit before 
 me through that tumult ; — I heard them 
 shout her name ; — her shriek fell on my 
 ear ; and the very thought so palsied me 
 
 o
<#PG# 301>

 
 
 with terror, that I stood fixed and statue- 
 like on the spot. 
 
 Recollecting, however, the fearful pre- 
 ciousness of every moment, and that — 
 perhaps, at this very instant — some emis- 
 saries of blood might be on their way to 
 the Grottos, I rushed wildly out of the 
 Forum, and made my way to the quay. 
 
 The streets were now crowded ; but I 
 ran headlong through the multitude, and 
 was already under the portico leading 
 down to the river, — already saw the boat 
 that was to bear me to Alethe, — when a 
 Centurion stood sternly in my path, and I 
 was surrounded and arrested by soldiers ! 
 It was in vain that I implored, that I strug- 
 gled with them as for life, assuring them 
 that I was a stranger, — that I was an 
 Athenian, — that I was — not a Christian. 
 The precipitation of my flight was suffi- 
 cient evidence against me, -and unrelent- 
 ingly, and by force, they bore me away to 
 the quarters of their Chief.
<#PG# 302>

 
 
 It was enough to drive me to madness ! 
 Two hours, two frightful hours, was I 
 kept waiting the arrival of the Tribune 
 of their Legion*, — my brain burning 
 with a thousand fears and ima2[inations, 
 which every passing minute made more 
 likely to be realised. Every thing, too, 
 that I could collect from the conversations 
 around me but added to the agonising 
 apprehensions with which I was racked. 
 Troops, it was said, had been sent in all 
 directions through the neighbourhood, to 
 bring in the rebellious Christians, and 
 make them bow before the Gods of the 
 Empire. With horror, too, I heard of 
 Orcus, — Orcus, the High Priest of Mem- 
 phis, — as one of the principal instigators 
 of this sanguinary edict, and as here pre- 
 sent in Antinoe, animating and directing 
 its execution. 
 
 In this stafe of torture I remained till 
 
 * A rank, resembling that of Colonel, 
 o 2
<#PG# 303>

 
 
 the arrival of the Tribune. Absorbed in 
 my own thoughts, I had not perceived his 
 entrance ; — till, hearing a voice, in a tone 
 of friendly surprise, exclaim, " Alciphron ! " 
 I looked up, and in this legionary Chief 
 recognised a young Roman of rank, who 
 had held a military command, the year 
 before, at Athens, and was one of the 
 most distinguished visitors of the Garden. 
 It was no time, however, for courtesies ; 
 — he was proceeding with all cordiality to 
 greet me, but, having heard him order my 
 instant release, I could wait for no more. 
 Acknowledging his kindness but by a 
 grasp of the hand, I flew off, like one 
 frantic, through the streets, and, in a few 
 minutes, was on the river. 
 
 My sole hope had been to reach the 
 Grottos before any of the detached parties 
 should arrive, and, by a timely flight across 
 the desert, rescue, at least, Alethe fi'oni 
 their fury. The ill-fated delay that had 
 occurred rendered this hope almost des-
<#PG# 304>

 
 
 perate ; but the tranquillity I found every 
 where as I proceeded down the river, and 
 the fond confidence I still cherished in the 
 sacred ness of the Hermit's retreat, kept 
 my heart from giving way altogether under 
 its terrors. 
 
 Between the current and my oars, the 
 boat flew, like wind, along the waters; and 
 I was already near the rocks of the ravine, 
 when I saw, turning out of the canal into 
 the river, a barge crowded with people, 
 and glittering with arms ! How did I ever 
 survive the shock of that sight ? The oars 
 dropped, as if struck out of my hands, into 
 the water, and I sat, helplessly gazing, as 
 that terrific vision approached. In a few 
 minutes, the current brought us tojrether: 
 — and I saw, on the deck of the barge, 
 Alethe and the Hermit surrounded by 
 soldiers ! 
 
 We were already passing each other 
 when, with a desperate effort, I sprang 
 from my boat and lighted upon the edge 
 of their vessel. I knew not what I did, for 
 
 o 3
<#PG# 305>

 
 
 despair was my only prompter. Snatch- 
 ing at the sword of one of the soldiers, as 
 I stood tottering on the edge, I had suc- 
 ceeded in wresting it out of his hands, 
 when, at the same moment, I received 
 a thrust of a lance from one of his com- 
 rades, and fell backward into the river. 
 I can just remember rising again and 
 making a grasp at the side of the vessel ; 
 — but the shock, the faintness from my 
 wound, deprived me of all consciousness, 
 and a shriek from Alethe, as I sunk, is all 
 I can recollect of what followed. 
 
 Would I had then died ! — Yet, no, 
 Almighty Being — I should have died in 
 darkness, and I have lived to know Thee ! 
 
 On returning to my senses, I found 
 myself reclined on a couch, in a splendid 
 apartment, the whole appearance of which 
 being Grecian, I, for a moment, forgot 
 all that had passed, and imagined myself 
 in my own home at Athens. But too 
 soon the whole dreadful certainty flashed 
 upon me ; and, starting wildly — dis-
<#PG# 306>

 
 
 abled as I was — from my couch, 1 called 
 loudly, and with the shriek of a maniac, 
 on Alethe. 
 
 I was in the house, I found, of my 
 friend and disciple, the young Tribune, 
 who had made the Governor acquainted 
 with my name and condition, and had re- 
 ceived me under his roof, when brought, 
 bleeding and insensible, to Antinoe. From 
 him I now learned at once, — for I could 
 not wait for details, — the sum of all that 
 had happened in that dreadful interval. 
 Melanius was no more, — Alethe, still 
 alive, but in prison ! 
 
 " Take me to her " — I had but time to 
 say — " take me to her instantly, and let 
 me die by her side," — when, nature again 
 failing under such shocks, I relapsed into 
 insensibility. In this state I continued for 
 near an hour, and, on recovering, found the 
 Tribune by my side. The horrors, he said, 
 of the Forum were, for that day, over, — 
 but what the morrow might bring, he shud- 
 dered to contemplate. His nature, it was 
 
 o 4-
<#PG# 307>

 
 
 plain, revolted from the inhuman duties 
 in which he was engaged. Touched by 
 the agonies he saw me suffer, he, in some 
 degree, relieved them, by promising that 
 I should, at night-fall, be conveyed to 
 the prison, and, if possible, through his 
 influence, gain access to Alethe. She 
 might yet, he added, be saved, could I 
 succeed in persuading her to comply with 
 the terms of the edict, and make sacri- 
 fice to the Gods. — " Otherwise," said 
 he, " there is no hope ; — the vindictive 
 Orcus, who has resisted even this short 
 respite of mercy, will, to-morrow inex- 
 orably demand his prey." 
 
 He then related to me, at my own re- 
 quest, — though every word was torture, 
 — all the harrowing details of the pro- 
 ceeding before the Tribunal. " I have 
 seen courage," said he, " in its noblest 
 forms, in the field ; but the calm intre- 
 pidity with which that aged Hermit en- 
 dured torments — which it was hardly 
 less torment to witness — surpassed all
<#PG# 308>

 
 
 that I could have conceived of human 
 fortitude ! " 
 
 My poor Alethe, too, — in describing 
 to me her conduct, the brave man wept 
 like a child. Overwhelmed, he said, at 
 first by her apprehensions for my safety, 
 she had given way to a full burst of wo- 
 manly weakness. But no sooner was she 
 brought before the Tribunal, and the de- 
 claration of her faith was demanded of her, 
 than a spirit almost supernatural seemed 
 to animate her whole form. " She raised 
 her eyes," said he, " calmly, but with fer- 
 vour, to heaven, while a blush was the only 
 sign of mortal feeling on her features ; — 
 and the clear, sweet, and untrembling 
 voice, with which she pronounced her 
 own doom, in the words, ' I am a Chris- 
 tian ! ' sent a thrill of admiration and pity 
 throughout the multitude. Her youth, her 
 loveliness, affected all hearts, and a cry of 
 ' Save the young maiden ! ' was heard in 
 all directions." 
 
 o 5
<#PG# 309>

 
 
 Tlie implacable Orcus, however, would 
 not hear of mercy. Resenting, as it ap- 
 peared, with all his deadliest rancour, not 
 only her own escape from his toils, but the 
 aid with which she had, so fatally to his 
 views, assisted mine, he demanded loudly, 
 and in the name of the insulted sanctuary 
 of Isis, her instant death. It was but by 
 the firm intervention of the Governor, 
 who shared the general sympathy in her 
 fate, that the delay of another day was 
 accorded, to give a chance to the young 
 maiden of yet recalling her confession, and 
 thus affording some pretext for saving her. 
 
 Even in yielding reluctantly to this 
 brief respite, the inhuman Priest would 
 yet accompany it with some mark of his 
 vengeance. Whether for the pleasure 
 (observed the Tribune) of mingling mock- 
 ery with his cruelty, or as a warning to her 
 of the doom she must ultimately expect, 
 he gave orders that there should be tied 
 round her brow one of those chaplets of
<#PG# 310>

 
 
 coral *, with which it is the custom of 
 young Christian maidens to array them- 
 selves on the day of their martyrdom ; — 
 " and, thus fearfully adorned," said he, 
 " she was led away, amid the gaze of the 
 pitying multitude, to prison." 
 
 With these details the short interval 
 till night-foil, — every minute of which 
 seemed an age, — was occupied. As soon 
 as it grew dark, I was placed upon a 
 litter, — my wound, though not dangerous, 
 requiring such a conveyance, — under the 
 guidance of my friend, and conducted to 
 the prison. Through his interest with 
 the guard, we were without difficulty ad- 
 mitted, and I was borne into the chamber 
 where the maiden lay immured. Even the 
 veteran guardian of the place seemed 
 touched with compassion for his prisoner, 
 and supposing her to be asleep, had the 
 litter placed gently near her. 
 
 * Une " de ces couronnes de grain de corail, dont 
 les vierges martyres ornoient leurs cheveux en 
 allant a la mort." Lcs Martyrs. 
 
 o 6
<#PG# 311>

 
 
 Slie was half reclining, with her face 
 hid in her hands, upon a couch, — at the 
 foot of which stood an idol, over whose 
 hideous features a lamp of naphtha, hanging 
 from the ceiling, shed a wild and ghastly 
 glare. On a table before the image stood 
 a censer, with a small vessel of incense 
 beside it, — one grain of which, thrown 
 voluntarily into -the flame, would, even 
 now, save that precious life. So strange, 
 so fearful was the whole scene, that I 
 almost doubted its reality. Alethe ! my 
 own, happy Alethe ! can it, I thought, be 
 thou that I look upon ? 
 
 She now, slowly, and with difficulty, 
 raised her 'head from the couch, on ob- 
 serving which, the kind Tribune with- 
 drew, and we were left alone. There was 
 a paleness, as of death, over her features ; 
 and those eyes, which when last I saw 
 them, were but too bright, too happy 
 for this world, looked dim and sunken. 
 In raising herself up, she put her hand, 
 as if from pain, to her forehead, whose
<#PG# 312>

 
 
 marble hue but appeared more death-like 
 from those red bands that lay so awfully 
 across it. 
 
 After wandering vaguely for a minute, 
 her eyes rested upon me. — and, with a 
 shriek, half terror, half joy, she sprung 
 from the couch, and sunk upon her knees 
 by my side. She had believed me dead ; 
 and, even now, scarcely trusted her 
 senses. " My husband ! my love !" she 
 exclaimed ; " oh, if thou comest to call me 
 from this world, behold I am ready!" 
 In saying thus, she pointed wildly to that 
 ominous wreath, and then dropped her 
 head down upon my knee, as if an arrow 
 had pierced it. 
 
 "Alethe!" I cried, — terrified to the 
 very soul by that mysterious pang, — and 
 as, if the sound of my voice had reani- 
 mated her, she looked up, with a faint 
 smile, in my face. Her thoughts, which 
 had evidently been wandering, became 
 collected ; and in her joy at my safety, 
 her sorrow at my suffering, she forgot
<#PG# 313>

 
 
 wholly the fate that impended over herself. 
 Love, innocent love, alone occupied all 
 her thoughts ; and tlie warmth, the tender- 
 ness with which she spoke, — how rap- 
 turously, at any other moment, would I 
 have listened, have lingered upon, have 
 blessed every word ! 
 
 But the time flew fast — the dreadful 
 morrow was approaching. Already I saw 
 her writhing in the hands of the torturer, 
 — the flames, the racks, the wheels were 
 before my eyes ! Half frantic with the fear 
 that her resolution was fixed, I flung myself 
 from the litter, in an agony of weeping, and 
 supplicated her, by the love she bore me, 
 by the happiness that awaited us, by her 
 own merciful God, who v.'as too good to 
 require such a sacrifice, — by all that the 
 most passionate anxiety could dictate, I 
 implored that she would avert from us the 
 doom that was coming, and — but for once 
 — comply with the vain ceremony demand- 
 ed of her. 
 
 Shrinking from me, as 1 spoke, — but
<#PG# 314>

 
 
 with a look more of sorrow than reproach, 
 — " What, tliou, too !" she said mourn- 
 fully, — " thou, into whose spirit I had 
 fondly hoped the same light had entered 
 as into my own ! No, never be thou 
 leagued with them who would tempt me 
 to ' make shipwreck of my faith !' Thou, 
 who couldst alone bind me to life, use not 
 thy power ; but let me die, as He I serve 
 hath commanded, — die for the Truth. 
 Remember the holy lessons we heard on 
 those nights, those happy nights, when 
 both the present and future smiled upon 
 us, — when even the gift of eternal life 
 came more welcome to my soul, from the 
 blessed conviction that thou wert to be 
 a sharer in it ; — shall I forfeit now that 
 divine privilege? shall I deny the true 
 God, whom we then learned to love ? 
 
 " No, my own betrothed," she con- 
 tinued, — pointing to the two rings on 
 her finger, — " behold these pledges, — 
 they are both sacred. I should have been 
 as true to thee as I am now to heaven, —
<#PG# 315>

 
 
 nor in that life to which I am hastenlnsr 
 shall our love be forgotten. Should the 
 baptism of fire, through which I shall pass 
 to-morrow, make me worthy to be heard 
 before the Throne of Grace, I will inter- 
 cede for thy soul — I will pray that it 
 may yet share with mine that * inherit- 
 ance, immortal and undefiled,' which 
 Mercy offers, and that thou, — my dear 
 mother, — and I — " 
 
 She here dropped her voice; the mo- 
 mentary animation, with which devotion 
 and affection had inspired her, vanished; — 
 and there came a darkness over all her 
 features, a livid darkness, — like the ap- 
 proach of death — that made me shudder 
 through every limb. Seizing my hand 
 convulsively, and looking at me with a 
 fearful eagerness, as if anxious to hear 
 some consoling assurance from my own 
 lips, — " Believe me," she continued, "not 
 all the torments they are preparing for 
 me, — not even this deep, burning pain in 
 my brow, to which they will hardly find an
<#PG# 316>

 
 
 equal, — could be half so dreadful to me, 
 as the thought that I leave thee " 
 
 Here, her voice again failed; her head 
 sunk upon my arm, and — merciful God, 
 let me forget what I then felt, — I 
 saw that she was dying ! Whether I 
 uttered any cry, I know not ; — but the 
 Tribune came rushing into my chamber, 
 and, looking on the maiden, said, with a 
 face full of horror, " It is but too true ! " 
 
 He then told me in a low voice, what 
 he had just learned from the guardian of 
 the prison, that the band round the young 
 Christian's brow was — oh horrible cruel- 
 ty ! — a compound of the most deadly 
 poison, — the hellish invention of Orcus, 
 to satiate his vengeance, and make the fate 
 of his poor victim secure. My first move- 
 ment was to untie that fatal wreath, — but 
 it would not come away — it would not 
 come away ! 
 
 Roused by the pain, she again looked 
 in my face; but, unable to speak, took 
 hastily from her bosom the small silver
<#PG# 317>

 
 
 cross which she had brought with her from 
 my cave. Having prest it to her own Hps, 
 she held it anxiously to mine, and seeing 
 me kiss the lioly symbol with fervour, 
 looked happy, and smiled. The agony of 
 death seemed to have passed away ; — 
 there came suddenly over her features a 
 heavenly light, some share of which I 
 felt descending into my own soul, and, in 
 a few minutes more, she expired in my 
 arms. 
 
 Here ends the Maniiscrij)t ; hut^ on the 
 outer cover there is, in the hand-'mritinp 
 of a much later period, the folloiioing 
 Notice, extracted, as it appears, from 
 some Egyptian martyrology : — 
 
 " Alciphron, — an Epicurean philoso- 
 pher, converted to Christianity a. d. 257, 
 by a young Egyptian maiden, who suffered 
 martyrdom in that year. Immediately 
 upon her death he betook hunself to the 
 desert, and lived a life, it is said, of much
<#PG# 318>

 
 
 holiness and penitence. During the per- 
 secution under Dioclesian, his sufferings 
 for the faith were most exemplary; and, 
 being at length, at an advanced age, con- 
 demned to hard labour, for refosing to 
 comply with an Imperial edict, he died at 
 the Brass Mines of Palestine, a. d. 297. — 
 " As Alciphron held the opinions main- 
 tained since by Arius, his memory has not 
 been spared by Athanasian writers, who, 
 among other charges, accuse him of hav- 
 ing been addicted to the superstitions of 
 Egypt. For this calumny, however, there 
 appears to be no better foundation than 
 a circumstance, recorded by one of his 
 brother monks, that there was found, 
 after his death, a small metal mirror, like 
 those used in the ceremonies of Isis, sus- 
 pended round his neck."
<#PG# 319>

<#PG# 320>

 
 
 Page 17. — For the importance attached to dreams by 
 the ancients, see Jortin, Remarks on Ecclesiastical His- 
 tory, vol. 1. p. 90. 
 
 Page 22. — " The Pillar of Pillars " — more properly, 
 perhaps, "the Column of the Pillars." v. Abdallatif, Re- 
 lation de I'Egypte, and the notes of M. de iSVicy. The 
 great portico round this column (formerly designated 
 Pompey's, but now known to have been erected in ho- 
 nour of Dioclesian) was still standing, M, de Sacy says, 
 in the time of Saladin. v. Lord Valenda's Travels. 
 
 Page 23. — Ammianus thus speaks of the state of 
 Alexandria in his time, which was, I believe, as late as 
 the end of the fourth century : — " Ne nunc quidem in 
 eadem urbe Doctrinae variae silent, non apud nos exaruit 
 Musica nee Harmonia conticuit." Lib. 22. 
 
 Page 25. — From the character of the features of the 
 Sphinx, and a passage in Herodotus, describing the 
 Egyptians as ix^Kayxpo^^ ''i"' ovXorptKfs, Volney, Bruce, 
 and a few others, have concluded that the ancient inha- 
 bitants of Egypt were negroes. But this opinion is con-
<#PG# 321>

 
 
 tradicted by a host of authorities. See Castera's notes upon 
 Browne's Travels, for the result of Bhimenbach's dissec- 
 tion of a variety of mummies. Denon, speaking of the 
 character of the heads rcjjrescnted in tlie ancient sculpture 
 and painting of Egypt, says, "Celle desfemmes ressemble 
 encore a la figure des jolies femmes d'aujourd'hui : 
 de la rondeiir, de la volupt^, le nez petit, les yeux longs, 
 peu ouverts," &c. &c. He could judge, too, he says, 
 from the female mummies, " que leurs cheveux i^'toient 
 longs et lisses, que le caractere de t6te de la jjlupart 
 tenoit du beau style." — " Je rapportai," he adds, " une 
 tcte de vieille femme qui etoit aussi belle que eel les de 
 IVIichel-Ange, et leur ressembloit beaucoup." 
 
 In a " Description generate de T/iebes,'" by Messrs. 
 Jollois et Desvilliers, they say, " Toutes les sculptures 
 Egyptiennes, depuis les plus grands colosses de Thebes 
 jusqu'aux plus petites idoles, ne rappellent en aucune 
 mani^re les traits de la figure des negres ; outre que les 
 tetes des momies des catacombes de Thebes prc^'sentent 
 des profils droits." See also M. Jomarcfs " Description 
 of Syene and the Cataracts," Baron Larrey, on the 
 " conformation physique " of the Egyptians, &c. But 
 the most satisfactory refutation of the opinion of Volney 
 has been afforded, within these few years, by Doctor 
 Granville, who having been lucky enough to obtain 
 possession of a perfect female mummy, has, by the dis- 
 section and admeasurement of its form, completely 
 established the fact, that the ancient Egyptians were of 
 the Caucasian race, not of the Ethiopian. See this 
 gentleman's curious " Essay on Egyptiaji Mummies,'^ 
 read before the Royal Society, April 14. 1825. 
 
 De I'auw, the great depredator of every thing Egyp- 
 tian, has, on the authority of a passage in ^Elian, presumed 
 to affix to the countrywomen of Cleopatra the stigma of
<#PG# 322>

 
 
 complete and unredeemed ugliness. The following line 
 of Euripides, liowever, is an answer to such charges : — 
 
 NfjAoK iJ.€V aiSe KaWmapOfvoi poai. 
 
 In addition to the celebrated instances of Cleopatra, 
 Rhodope, &c. we are told, on the authority of Manetho 
 (as given by Zoega from Georgius Syncellus), of a beau- 
 tiful queen of Memphis, Nitocris, of the sixth dynasty, 
 who, in addition to other charms and perfections, was 
 (rather inconsistently with the negro hypothesis) i,avQri 
 
 See, for a tribute to the beauty of the Egyptian women, 
 IVIontesquieu's Temple de Guide. 
 
 Page 35. — " Among beds of lotus Jlowers." — v. Slrabo- 
 
 Page 36. — " Isle of the golden Venus.'" — " On trouve 
 une lie appel(5e Venus- Doree, ou le champ d'or, avantde 
 remonter jusqu'a jNIemphis. " Voyages de Pythagore. 
 
 Page 39. — For an account of the Table of Emerald, 
 V. Lettres sur I'Origine des Dieux d'Egypte. JDe Pauiv 
 supposes it to be a modern fiction of the Arabs. Many 
 writers have fancied that tlie art of making gold was 
 the great secret that lay hid under the forms of Egyptian 
 theology. " La science Herme'tique," says the Benedic- 
 tine, Pemetz, " I'art sacerdotal 6toit la source de toutes 
 les richesses des Rois d'Egypte, et I'objet de ces mysteres 
 si caches sous le voile du leur pr^tendu Religion." 
 Fables Egyptiennes. The hieroglyphs, that formerly co- 
 vered the Pyramids, are supposed by some of these writers 
 to relate to the same art. See Mutus liber RupeUcB. 
 
 Page 40. — " By reflecting the sun's rays," says Clarke, 
 speaking of the Pyramids, " they appeared white as snow."
<#PG# 323>

 
 
 Page 41.— For Bubastis, the Diana of the Egyptians, 
 V. Jablonski, lib. 3. cap. 4. 
 
 Page 43. — " The light coracle," c^c. — v. Amailhon, 
 " Histoire de la Navigation et du Commerce des Egyp- 
 tiens sous Ics Ptolemies." See also, for a description of 
 the various kinds of boats used on the Nile, Maillet, 
 torn. i. p. 98. 
 
 Pao-e 44. — V. Maxtrice, Appendix to " Ruins of Ba- 
 bylon." Another reason, he says, for their worship of 
 the Ibis, " founded on their love of geometry, was (ac- 
 cording to Plutarch) that the space between its legs, 
 when parted asunder, as it walks, together with its beak, 
 forms a complete equilateral triangle. " From the exa- 
 mination of the embalmed birds, found in the Catacombs 
 of Saccara, there seems to be no doubt that the Ibis 
 was the same kind of bird as that described by Bruce, 
 under the Arabian name of Abou llannes. 
 
 lb. — " The sistrum, c^c. — " Isis est genius," says 
 Servius, " Jigypti, qui per sistri motum, quod gerit in 
 dextra, Nili accessus recessusque significat." 
 
 Page 48. — " The ivy encircled it," ^c. — The ivy 
 was consecrated to Osiris, v. Diodor. Sic. 1. 10. 
 
 lb. — " The small mirror." — " Quelques unes," says 
 Dupuis, describing the processions of Isis, " portoient 
 des miroirs attaches a leurs ^panics, afin de multiplier et 
 de porter dans tous les sens les images de la Deesse." 
 Origine des Culles, tom. 8. p. 847. A mirror, it ap- 
 pears, was also one of the emblems in the mysteries of 
 Bacchus.
<#PG# 324>

 
 
 Page 49. — " There is, to the north of Memphis,'' ^c 
 
 " Tout prouve que la territoire de Sakkarah ^toit la 
 Necropolis au sud de Memphis, et le faubourg oppos(5 a 
 celui-ci, ou sent les pyramides de Gizeh, une autre Ville 
 des Morts, qui terminoit Memphis au nord." Denon. 
 
 There is nothing known with certainty as to the site 
 of Memphis, but it will be perceived tliat the description 
 of its position given by the Epicurean corresponds, in 
 almost every particular, with that which M. Maillet (the 
 PVench consul, for many years, at Cairo) has, in liis work 
 on Eg\-pt, left us. It must be always borne in mind, too, 
 that of the distances between the respective places here 
 mentioned, we have no longer any accurate means of 
 judging. 
 
 Page 49.— « Pyramid beyond Pyramid." — « Multas 
 
 olim pyramidas fuisse e ruinis arguitur. " Zoca. 
 
 Vansleb, who visited more than ten of the small pyramids, 
 is of opinion that there must have originally been a 
 hundred in tliis place. 
 
 See, on the subject of the lake to the northward of 
 Memphis, Shaw's TravelSy p. 302. 
 
 Page 57. — " The Theban beetle." — " On voit en 
 Egypte, apres la retraite du Nil et la fecondation des 
 ten-es, le limon couvert d'une multitude de scarab^es. 
 Un pareil ph^nomene a du sembler aux Egyptiens le 
 plus propre k peindre une nouvelle existence." M. 
 Jomard. — Partly for the same reason, and partly for 
 another, still more fanciful, the early Christians used to 
 apply this emblem to Christ. " Bonus ille scarab^us 
 meus," says St. Augustine, " non ea tantum de causa 
 quod unigenitus, quod ipsemet sui auctor mortalium 
 speciem induerit, sed quod in hac nostra faece sese volu, 
 laverit et ex hac ips4 nasci voluerit." 
 
 P
<#PG# 325>

 
 
 Page 57 " Enshrined within a cnae of crystal.'' — 
 
 " Les Egyptiensont fait aussi, pour conserver leurs morts, 
 des caisses de verre." Be Pmnv. — He mentions, also, 
 in another place, a sort of transparent substance, which 
 the Ethiojiians used for the same purpose, and which 
 was frequently mistaken by the Greeks for glass. 
 
 Page 58. — " Among the emblems of death." — " Un 
 pretre, qui brise la tige d'une fleur, des oiseaux qui 
 s'envolent, sont les embl^mes de la morte et de Vkme qui 
 se s^'pare du corps." Denon. 
 
 Theseus employs the same image in the Phsedra : — 
 
 . Opvis "yap ws rts eK x^P'^'' a<pavTos ei 
 riijSTjju' €S aSov iriKpov dpfiTiffaffa /i.ot. 
 
 Page 59. — " The singular appearance of a Cross so 
 frequently recurring among the hieroglyphics of Egypt, 
 had excited the curiosity of the Christians at a very early 
 period of ecclesiastical history ; and as some of the 
 Priests, who were acquainted with the meaning of the 
 hieroglyphics, became converted to Christianity, the se- 
 cret transpired. ' The converted heathens,^ says Socrates 
 Scholasticus, ' explained the symbol, and declared that 
 it signified Life to Come.'" Clarke. 
 
 Lipsius, therefore, is mistaken in supposing the Cross 
 to have been an emblem peculiar to the Christians. See, 
 on this subject, L'Histoire des Jiiifs, liv. 9. c. 16. 
 
 It is singular enough that while the Cross was thus held 
 sacred among the Egyptians, not only the custom of 
 , marking the forehead with the sign of the Cross, but 
 Baptism and the consecration of the bread in the Eu- 
 charist were imitated in the mysterious ceremonies of 
 Mithra. Tertull. de Proscriptione Herelicorum. 
 
 Zoega is of opinion that the Cross, said to have been.
<#PG# 326>

 
 
 for the first time, found on the destruction of the temple of 
 Serapis, by the Christians, could not have been the crux 
 ansata ; as nothing is more common than this emblem on 
 all the Egyptian monuments. 
 
 Page 62. — " Stood shadoxvless." — It was an idea 
 entertained among the ancients that the Pyramids were 
 so constructed (" mecanica constructione," says Ammi- 
 anus Marcellinus) as never to cast any shadow. 
 
 Page 64. — " Rhodojie." — From the story of Rho- 
 dope, Zoega thinks, " videntur Arabes ansara arripuisse 
 ut in una ex pjTamidibus, genii loco, habitare dicerent 
 mulierem nudam insignis piilchritudinis quje aspecto suo 
 homines insanire faciat." De Usu Obeliscorum. See 
 also L'Egi/pte de Murtadipar Vattier. 
 
 Page 66. — " The Gates of Oblivion"— " Apud Mem- 
 phim aneas quasdam portas, quae Lethes et Cocyti (hoc 
 est oblivionis et lamentationis) appellanter aperiri, gra- 
 vem asperumque edentes sonura." Zoega. 
 
 Page 69. — "A pile of lifeless bodies." — See, for the 
 custom of burying the dead upright (" post funus stantia 
 busto corpora," as Statins describes it). Dr. Clarke's pre- 
 face to the 2d section of his fifth volume. They used to 
 insert precious stones in the place of the eyes. " Les yeux 
 ^toient formes d'^-meraudes, de turquoises," &c. — v. 
 Masoudi/, quoted by Quatremere. 
 
 Page 72. — " It seemed as if every ecko.^' — See, for 
 the echoes in the pyramids, Plutarch, de Placitis Philo- 
 soph. 
 
 Page 74. — " Pale phantom-lUe shapes." — " Ce mo- 
 ment heureux (de I'Autopsie) etoit prepare par des scenes 
 
 P 2
<#PG# 327>

 
 
 t'Hiayantfis, par des alternatives de crainte et de joie, de 
 liimiere et de tenebres, par la lueur des Eclairs, par 
 li- l)ruit terrible de la foudre, qu'on imitoit, et par de:» 
 apparitions de spectres, des illusions magiques, qui frap- 
 poient les yeux et Ics oreilles tout ensemble." Dupuis. 
 
 Page 77. — " Serpents ofjire. — " Ccs consid^i-ations 
 me portent a penser que, dans les mysteres, ces ph^no- 
 m^nes ^toient beaucoup mieux ex^cuttes et sans com- 
 paraison plus terriblcs a I'aide de (juelque composition 
 pyrique, qui est rcstee cachee, connne celle du feu 
 Gregeois." De Pauw. 
 
 Page 78. — " The burning of the reed-beds of Ethio- 
 pia," " II n'y a point d'autre moyen que de porter le 
 
 feu dans ces forCts de roseaux, qui ri'epandent alors dans 
 tout le pais une lumi^re aussi considerable que celle du 
 jour m^me." Maillet, torn. 1. p. 6:!. 
 
 Page 79. — " The sound of torrents." — The Nile, 
 Flint/ tells us, was admitted into the Pyramid. 
 
 Page 81. — " I had almost given myself up" — " On 
 exergoit," says Dupuis, " les recipiendaires, pendant 
 plusieurs jours, a traverser, a la nage, une grande <-tendue 
 d'eau. On les y jettoit et ce n'ctoit que avec peine qu'ils 
 s'en retiroient. On appliquoit le fer et le feu sur leurs 
 mombres. On les faisoit passer a. travers les flammes." 
 
 The aspirants were often in considerable danger, and 
 Pythagoras, we are told, nearly lost his life in the trials. 
 V. Recherches sur les Initiations, par liouin. 
 
 Page 90. — For tlie two cups used in the mysteries, 
 *ee VHistoire desJuifs, liv. 9. c. 10".
<#PG# 328>

 
 
 Page 90. " Osiris." — Osiris, under the name of 
 
 Serapis, was supposed to rule over the suljterranean world ; 
 and performed the office of Pluto, in the mythology of 
 the Egyptians. " They believed," says Dr. Pritchard, 
 " that Serapis presided over the region of departed souls, 
 during the period of their absence, when languishing 
 without bodies, and that the dead were deposited in his 
 palace." Analysis of the Egyptian Mythology. 
 
 lb " To cool the lips of the dead."— " Frigidani 
 
 illam aquam post mortem, tanquam Hebes poculum, ex- 
 petitam." Zoega. — The Lethe of the Egyptians was 
 called Ameles. See Dupuis, tom. 8. p. 651. 
 
 lb. "A draught divine." — Diodor. Sicul- 
 
 Page 93. — " Grasshopper, symbol of initiation." — 
 Hor. Apoll. — The grasshopper was also consecrated 
 to the sun as being musical. 
 
 Page 94. — " Isle of gardens." — The isle Antirrhodus, 
 near Alexandria. Maillet. 
 
 lb. — " Vineyard at Anthylla." — v. Athen. Deipnos. 
 
 Page 97. — " We can see those stars." — " On voyoit 
 en plein jour par ces ouvertures les ^toiles, et m6me 
 quelques planetes en leur plus grande latitude septentrio- 
 nale ; et les pretres avoient bientot profit^ de ce ph^no- 
 mene pour observer a. diverses heures la passage des 
 ^toiles." Sethos. — Strabo mentions certain caves or pits, 
 constructed for the purijose of astronomical observations, 
 which lay in the Zelopolitan prefecture, beyond Heliopolis. 
 
 Page 98 "A plantain." — This tree was dedicated 
 
 p 3
<#PG# 329>

 
 
 to the Genii of tjie Shades, from its being an emblem of 
 repose and cooling airs. " Cui imminet musae folium, 
 quod ab Iside infera gcniisque ci addictis manu geri 
 solitum, unibram requiemque et auras frigidas subindi- 
 gitare videtur." Zoega. 
 
 Page 107. — " He spoke of the pre-existeiice of the soul,'' 
 ^c. — For a full account of the doctrines which are 
 here represented as having been taught to the initiated 
 in the Egyptian mysteries, the reader may consult JDu- 
 puis, Pritchard's Andt/sis of the Egyptian Mythology, 
 &c. See. " L'on d('xouvroit I'origine de I'ame, sa chute 
 sur la terre, ^ travers les sjjli^res et les ^l^mens, et son 
 retour au lieu de son origine .... c'etoit ici la partiu la 
 plus m^taphysique, et que ne pourroit guere entendre le 
 commun des Initios, mais dont on lui donnoit le spectacle 
 par des figures et des spectres all('*goriques. " Dujmis. 
 
 Page lOS. — " Those folds of radiance." — See Beau- 
 sobre, liv. 3. c. 4. for the " terre bienheureuse et lumi- 
 neuse " which the Manicheans supposed God to inhabit. 
 Plato, too, speaks (in Phxd.) of a " pure land lying in 
 the pure sky (ttjp jtiv KaQapav ev icadapq) KeiaOai ovpavcp), 
 the abode of divinity, of innocence, and of life." 
 
 Page 110. — " Tracing it from the frst moment of 
 earthward desire." — In the original construction of this 
 work, there was an episode introduced here, (which I 
 have since published in another form,) illustrating the 
 doctrine of the fall of the soul by the Oriental fable of 
 the Loves of the Angels. 
 
 'a^ 
 
 Page 111 — " Restoring her lost wings. " — Damascius, 
 in his Life of Isidorus, says, " Ex antiquissimis Philoso- 
 phis Pythagoram et Platonem Isidorus ut Dcos coluit.
<#PG# 330>

 
 
 et eorum animus alatas esse dixit quas in locum supercoe- 
 lestem inque campuin veritatis et pratum elcvatas, divinis 
 putavit ideis pasci." yipud Phot. Bibliothec. 
 
 Page 11 2. — " A pale mounlike meteor." — Apuleius, 
 in describing the miraculous appearances exhibited in the 
 mysteries, says, " Nocte media vidi solem candido co- 
 ruscantem lumine." Afctamorphos. lib. 11. 
 
 Page 113. — "So entirely did the Ulusio7i of the scene," 
 ^c. — In tracing the early connection of spectacles 
 •%vith the ceremonies of religion, Voltaire says, " II y a 
 bien plus ; les veritables grandes tragedies, les represent- 
 ations imposantes et terribles, ^toient les myst^res sacres, 
 qu'on cel^broit dans les plus vastes temples du monde, en 
 presence des seuls Initios ; c'etoit la que les habits, les 
 decorations, les machines etoient propres au sujet ; et 
 le sujet etoit la vie pr^sente et la vie future." Des 
 divers changemens arrives a, fart tragiq%ie. 
 
 To these scenic representations in the Egyptian mys- 
 teries, there is evidently an allusion in the vision of 
 Ezekiel, where the spirit shows him the abominations 
 which the Israelites learned in Egypt : — '' Then said 
 he unto me, ' Son of man, hast thou seen what the an- 
 cients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man 
 in the chambers of his imagery ?' " Chap, 8. 
 
 Page 118. — *' The seven tables of stone." — " Bernard, 
 Comte de la Marche Tr^visane, instruit par la lecture 
 des livres anciens, dit qu' Hermes trouva sept tables dans 
 la valine d' Hebron, sur lesquelles etoient graves les prin- 
 cipes des arts liberaux." Fables Egyptiennes, See Ja- 
 blonski de stelis Herm. 
 
 Page 119. — " Beside the goat of Mendes," — For an 
 P 4
<#PG# 331>

 
 
 account of the animal worship of the Egyptians, see De 
 Pauw, torn. 2. 
 
 Page 119 " The Isiac serpents." — " On auguroit 
 
 bien dcs serpens Isiaques, lorsqu'ils goutoient roffVande 
 et se trainoient lentement autour dc I'autel." De Pauw. 
 
 Page 121. — " Hence the festivals and hymns,'" ^c. — 
 For an account of tlie various festivals at the diflerent 
 periods of the sun's progress, in the spring, and in the 
 autumn, see Dupuis and Pritchard. 
 
 lb. — " The mysteries of the night." — w Athenag. 
 Leg. pro Christ, p. 133. 
 
 Page 125. — " A jteal like that of thunder." — See, for 
 some curious remarks on the mode of imitating thunder 
 and lightning in the ancient mysteries, De Pauw, tom. 1 . 
 p. 323. The machine with which these effects were pro- 
 duced on the stage was called a ceraunoscope. 
 
 Page 131. — ^^ Windings capriciously intricate." — In 
 addition to the accounts which the ancients have left us 
 of the prodigious excavations in all parts of Egypt, — the 
 fifteen Imndred chambers under the Labyrinth — the sub- 
 terranean stables of the Thebai'd, containing a thousand 
 horses — the crypts of Upper Egypt passing under the 
 bed of the Nile, &c. ike. — the stories and traditions 
 current among the Arabs still preserve the memory of 
 those wonderful substructions. " Un Arabe," says Paul 
 Lucas, " qui ('■toil avec nous, m'assura qu'etant entr^ 
 autrefois dans le Labyrinthe, il avoit marclie dans les 
 chambres souterraines jusqu'en un lieu oii il y avoit une 
 grande place environn^e de plusieurs niches qui ressem- 
 bloita de petites boutiques, d'ou Ton entroit dans d'autres
<#PG# 332>

 
 
 allies et dans chambres, sans pouvoir en trouver la 
 fin." In speaking, too, of the arcades along the Nile, 
 near Cosseir, " lis me dirent meme que ces souterrains 
 etoient si profondcs qu'il y en avoient qui alloient a trois 
 jouiTK^es de la, et qu'ils conduisoient dans un pays ou 
 Ton voyoit de beaux jardins, qu'on y trouvoit de belles 
 maisons," &c. &c. 
 
 See also in M. Qualremere' s Memoires sur VEgypte, 
 torn. 1. p. 142., an account of a subterranean reservoir, 
 said to have been discovered at Ka"is, and of the expe- 
 dition undertaken by a party of persons, in a long narrow 
 boat, for the purpose of exploring it. " Leur voyage 
 avoit ^te de six jours, dont les quatre premiers furent 
 employes a pen<!trer les bords ; les deux autres k revenir 
 au lieu d'oij ils etoient partis. Pendant tout cet in- 
 tervalle ils ne purent atteindre I'extr^mit^ du bassin. 
 L'^mir Ala-eddin-Tamboga, gouverneur de Behnesa, 
 ^crivit ces details au sultan, qui en fut extr^ement sur- 
 pris." 
 
 Page 136. — "A small island in the centre of Lake 
 Maeris. " — The position here given to Lake Moeris, in 
 making it the immediate boundary of the city of Mem- 
 phis to the south, corresponds exactly with the site as- 
 signed to it by Maillet : — " IVIemphis avoit encore a. son 
 midi un vaste reservoir, par ou tout ce qui peut servir 
 k la commodity et k I'agr^ment de la vie lui etoit voitur^ 
 abondamment de toutes les parties de I'Egypte. Ce lac 
 qui la terminoit de ce c6t^-la," &c. &c. Tom. 2. p. 7. 
 
 lb. — " Ruins rising blackly above tlie wave." — " On 
 voit sur la rive orientale des antiquitds qui sent presque 
 entierement sous les eaux." Belzoni. 
 
 Page 137. — " Its thundering portals.^' ^ " Quorun- 
 p 5
<#PG# 333>

 
 
 (lam autoin domorum (in Labyrintho) talis est situs, ut 
 ad aperifntibus foris tonitru intus terribile existat." 
 Pliny. 
 
 Page 1 88. — " Leaves that serve as cups. " — Straho. 
 According to the French translator of Strabo, it was the 
 fruit of the/a6a jEgyptiaca, not the leaf, that was used for 
 this purpose. " Le Ki^wpiov," he says, " devoit s'enten- 
 dre de la capsule ou fruit de cette plante, dont les Egyp- 
 tiens se servoient comme d'un vase, imaginant que I'eau 
 du Nil y devenoit d^licieuse." 
 
 Page 1 42. — " Thejish of these waters," ^c. — uElian, 
 lib. 6. 32. 
 
 lb. — " Pleasure boats ur yachts." — Called Thala- 
 meges, from the pavilion on the deck. v. Strabo. 
 
 Page 144. — " Covered with beds of those pale, sweet 
 roses." — As April is the season for gathering these roses 
 (See Malte-Brun's Economical Calendar), the Epicurean 
 could not, of course, mean to say that he saw them 
 actually in flower. 
 
 Page 146. — " The lizards upon the bank." — " L'or 
 et I'azur brillent en bandes longitudinales sur leur corps 
 entier, et leur queue est du plus beau bleu celeste." 
 Sonnini. 
 
 Page 147. — " The canal through which we now sailed." 
 — " Un Canal," says Maillet, "tresprofond ettr^s large 
 y voituroit les eaux du Nil." 
 
 Page 150. — " For a draught of whose flood," ^c —
<#PG# 334>

 
 
 " Aiiciennement on portoit les caux du Nil jusqu'k des 
 contrees fort (jloignees, et surtout chez les princesses du 
 sang des Ptolom^es, mariees dans des families etran- 
 geres," De Fauw. 
 
 Page 154, — Bearing each the name of its owner." — 
 " Le nom du maitre y ^toit ^crit, pendant la nuit, en 
 lettres de feu." Maillet. 
 
 Page 155. — Cups of that frail crystal " — called Alas- 
 sontes. For their brittleness Martial is an authority . — 
 
 ToUe, puer, calices, tepidique toreumata Nili, 
 Et mihi secura pocula trade manu. 
 
 lb. — " Bracelets of the black beans of Abyssinia.'^ — 
 The bean of the Glycyne, which is so beautiful as to be 
 strung into necklaces and bracelets, is generally known 
 by tlie name of the black bean of Abyssinia. Nlehuhr. 
 
 lb. — " Sweet lotus-wood fute." — See M. Villoleau 
 on the musical instruments of the Egyj)tians. 
 
 Page 156. — " Shine like the brow of Mount Atlas at 
 night." — Solin'us speaks of the snowy summit of Mount 
 Atlas glittering with flames at night. In the account of 
 the Periplus of Hanno, as well as in that of Eudoxus, we 
 read that as those navigators were coasting this part of 
 Africa, torrents of light were seen to fall on the sea. 
 
 Page 158. — " The tears of I sis." — " Per lacrymas, 
 vero, Isidis intelligo effluvia quaedam Luna;, quibus tan- 
 tam vim videntur tribuisse ^gypti." Jablonski. — He is 
 of opinion that the superstition of the Nucta, or miracu-
<#PG# 335>

 
 
 lous drop, is a relic of the veneration paid to the dews, as 
 the tears of Isis. 
 
 Page 158. — " The rustling of the acaciai,'" ^-c. — 
 Travels of Captain Mangles. 
 
 lb. — " Supposed to rest in the valley of the moon." — 
 Pluiarch. Dupuis, torn. 10. The Manicheans held the 
 same belief. See Beausobre, p. 565. 
 
 Page 160 " Sothis, the fair star of the waters." — 
 
 vSpayooyov is the epithet applied to this star by Plutarch 
 de Isid. 
 
 Id. — " Was its birth-star." — 'H Scoflews avaroKr) 
 •yeveaetiis Karapxova-a ttjs ets rov Koff/Jiov. Porphyr. de 
 Antro Nytnph. 
 
 Page 168. — " Golden Mountains." — v, Wilford on 
 Egypt a7id the Nile, Asiatic Researches. 
 
 lb. — " Sweet-smelling 7vood." — "A I'^poque de la 
 cTue le Nil Vert charie les planches d'un bois qui a une 
 odeur semblable a celle de I'encens." Quatremcre. 
 
 Page 169. — " Barges full of bees. " — Maillet. 
 
 Page 170. — "Such a profusion of the ivhile flowers," 
 ^c. — " On les voit comme jadis cueiller dans les champs 
 des tiges du lotus, signes du d^'bordement et pr^'-sages de 
 I'abondancc ; ils s'enveloppent les bras et le corps avec 
 les longues tiges fleuries, et parcourent les rues," &c. 
 Description des Tombeaux des Rois, par M. Costaz.
<#PG# 336>

 
 
 Page 1 73. — " While composing his commentary on (he 
 scriptures." — ; It was during the composition of his 
 great critical work, the Ilexapla, that Origen employed 
 these female scribes. 
 
 Page 176. — " That rich tapestry," ^c. 
 
 Non ego praetulerim Babylonica picta superbe 
 
 Texta, Semiramia qua; variantur acu. 
 
 Martial. 
 
 Vage200. — " The Place of IFeeping." — \. Wilford, 
 Asiatic Researches, vol. 3. p. 340. 
 
 Page 210. — " We had long since left this mountain be- 
 hind." — The voyages on the Nile are, under favourable 
 circumstances, performed with considerable rapidity. 
 " En cinq ou six jours," says Maillei, " on pourroit aise- 
 ment remonter de I'embouchure du Nil a ses cataractes, 
 ou de&cendre des cataractes jusqu'k lamer." The great 
 uncertainty of the navigation is proved by what Behoni 
 tells us : — " Nous ne mimes cette fois que deux jours 
 et demi pour faire le trajet du Caire a IMelawi, auquel, 
 dans notre second voyage, nous avions employes dix-huit 
 jours." 
 
 Page 212. — " Those mighty statues, that fling their 
 shadows." — " EUes ont pr^s de vingt metres (61 pieds) 
 d'el^vation ; et au lever du soleil, leurs ombres immenses 
 s'^tendent au loin siu- la chaine Libyenne." Description 
 generate de Tliebes, par Messrs. Jollois et Desvilliers. 
 
 lb. — " Those cool alcoves." — Paul Lucas. 
 
 Page 219. — " Whose watersare half sweet, half bitter." 
 — Paul Lucas.
<#PG# 337>

 
 
 Page 224. — " Mounlain of the Birds. " — Tliere lias 
 been much controversy among the Arabian writers, 
 with respect to the site of this mountain, for which see 
 Quatremcre, torn. 1. art. Amoun. 
 
 Page 230. — " The hand of labour had succeeded;' ^c. 
 — The monks of Mou!it Sinai \ Shaw says) have covered 
 over near four acres of the naked rocks witli fruitful 
 gardens and orchards. 
 
 Page 233. — " The image of a head.'' — There was 
 usually, TertuUian tells us, the image of Christ on the 
 communion-cups. 
 
 lb. — " Xissed her forehead." — " We are rather dis- 
 posed to infer," says the present Bishop of Lincoln, in 
 liis very sensible work on TertuUian, "that, at the con- 
 clusion of all their meetings for the purpose of devotion, 
 the early Christians were accustomed to give the kiss of 
 peace, in token of the brotherly love subsisting between 
 them." 
 
 Page 237. — " In the middle of the seven vallet/s. " — 
 See Macrizy's account of these valleys, given by Quntre- 
 mere, torn. 1. p. 450. 
 
 lb. — " Red lakes of Nilria. " — For a striking descrip- 
 tion of this region, see " Rameses," — a work which, 
 though, in general, too technical and elaborate, shows, 
 in many passages, to what picturesque effects the scenery 
 and mythology of Egypt may be made subservient. 
 
 Page 238. — "In the neighbourhood of JtUino'c." — 
 From the position assigned to Antinoe in this work, we 
 ])ould conclude that it extended much farther to the
<#PG# 338>

 
 
 north, than the few ruins of it that remain would seem 
 to indicate, — so as to render the distance between the 
 city and the Mountain of the Birds considerably less 
 than what it appears to be at present. 
 
 Page 243. — " ir/ien Isis, the pure star of lovers." — 
 V. Plutarch de Isid. 
 
 lb. — " Ere she again embrace her bridegroom sun." — 
 " Conjunctio solis cum luna, quod est veluti utriusque 
 connubium. " Jablonski. 
 
 Page 247. — " Of his walks a lion is the companion." 
 
 — M. Chateaubriand has introduced Paul and his lion 
 into the " Martyrs" liv. 1 1 . 
 
 Page 235 " Come thus secretly before daybreak." — 
 
 It was among the accusations of Celsus against the Chris- 
 tians, that they held their assemblies privately and con- 
 trary to law ; and one of the speakers in the curious 
 work of Minucius Felix calls the Christians " latebrosa 
 et lucifugax natio." 
 
 Page 256. — " A swallow," S^-c. — " Je vis dans le 
 desert des hirondelles d'un gris clair comme le sable sur 
 lequel elles volent." — Denon. 
 
 Page 257. — " The comet that once desolated this world." 
 
 — In alluding to Whiston's idea of a comet having caused 
 the deluge, M. Girard, having remarked that the word 
 Typhon means a deluge, adds, " On ne pent entendre 
 par le terns du r^gne de Typhon que celui pendant 
 lequel le deluge inonda la terre, terns pendant lequel 
 on dCit observer la comete qui I'occasionna, et dont I'ap- 
 parition fut, non seulement pour les peuples de I'Egypte,
<#PG# 339>

 
 
 ot de I'Ethiopie, mais encore pour tons Ics peiiples le 
 presage funeste de leur destruction presque totale." — 
 Description de la Vallee de C Egarement. 
 
 Page 259. — " In which the qnrit of my dream" ^c 
 
 " Many people," said Orinen, " have been brought over 
 to Christianity by the Spirit of God giving a sudden 
 turn to their minds, and offering visions to them either 
 by day or night." On this Jortin remarks: — " Why 
 sliould it be thouglit im|)ro!jable that Pagans of good dis- 
 positions, but not free from prejudices, sliould have been 
 called by divine admonitions, by dreams or visions, wliich 
 might be a support to Christianity in those days of dis- 
 tress ?" 
 
 Page 263. — " One of those earthen cups." — Palladiia, 
 who lived some time in Egypt, describes the monk Pto- 
 lema'us, who inhabited the desert of Scete, as collecting 
 in earthen cups the abundant dew from the rocks. — 
 Bibliothec. Pat. torn. 13. 
 
 Page 264, — " It nms to preserve, he said" cj-c. — The 
 brief sketch here given of the Jewish dispensation agrees 
 very much with the view taken of it by Dr. Sumner, in 
 the first chapters of his eloquent and luminous work, the 
 " Records of the Creation." 
 
 Page 266. — " In vain did I seek the promise qfimmor- 
 tality." — " It is impossible to deny," says Dr. Sumner, 
 " that the sanctions of the INIosaic Law are altogether 
 
 temporal It is, indeed, one of the facts that can 
 
 only be explained by acknowledging that he really 
 acted under a divine commission, promulgating a tem- 
 porary law for a peculiar purpose," — a much more 
 candid and sensible way of treating this very difficult 
 point, than by either endeavouring; like Warburton, to
<#PG# 340>

 
 
 escape from it into a paradox, or, still worse, contriving, 
 like Dr. Graves, to increase its difficulty by explanation. 
 V. " On the Pentateuch." See also Home's Introduction, 
 4fC. vol. i. !>. 226. 
 
 Page 268 " ^lll area/ the dust," ^-c. — While Vol- 
 taire, Volney, <S:c. refer to the Ecclesiastes, as abounding 
 with tenets of materialism and Epicurism, Mr. Des 
 Voeux and others find in it strong proofs of belief in a 
 future state. The chief difficulty lies in the chapter 
 from which this text is quoted ; and the mode of con- 
 struction by which some writers attempt to get rid of it, 
 — namely, by putting these texts into the mouth of a 
 foolish reasoner, — appears forced and gratuitous, v. 
 Dr. Hales's Analysis. 
 
 Page 270. — " The noblest and first-created,"'' cj-c. — 
 This opinion of the Hermit may be supposed to have 
 been derived from his master, Origen ; but it is not easy 
 to ascertain the exact doctrine of Origen on this subject. 
 In the Treatise on Prayer attributed to him, he asserts that 
 God the Father alone should be invoked, — which, says 
 Bayle, is to " ench^rir sur les Heresies des Sociniens." 
 Notwithstanding this, however,and some other indications 
 of, what was afterwards called, Arianism (such as the 
 opinion of the divinity being received by communication, 
 which Milner asserts to have been held by this Father), 
 Qrigen was one of the authorities quoted by Athanasius 
 in support of his high doctrines of co-eternity and co- 
 essentiality. What Priestley says is, perhaps, the best 
 solution of these inconsistencies ; — " Origen, as well as 
 Clemens Alexandrinus, has been thought to favour the 
 Arian principle ; but he did it only in words, and not in 
 ideas." Early Ojnnions, ij;c. Whatever uncertainty, 
 however, there may exist with respect to the opinion of
<#PG# 341>

 
 
 Origen himself on this subject, there is no doubt that the 
 doctrines of his immediate followers were, at least, Anti- 
 Athanasian. " So many Bishops of Africa," says Priest- 
 ley, " were, at this period (between the years 255 and 
 258), Unitarians, that Athanasius says, ' The Son of 
 God,' — meaning his divinity, — ' was scarcely any 
 longer preached in the churches. ' " 
 
 Page 271. — " The restoration of the ivhole human race 
 to purity and hajjpiness." — Tliis benevolent doctrine, — 
 which not only goes far to solve the great problem of 
 moral and physical evil, but which would, if received 
 more generally, tend to soften the spirit of uncharitable- 
 ness, so fatally prevalent among Christian sects, — was 
 maintained by that great light of the early Church, 
 Origen, and has not wanted supporters among more 
 modern Theologians. That Tillotson was inclined to 
 the opinion appears from his sermon preached before the 
 queen. Paley is supposed to have held the same amiable 
 doctrine ; and Newton (the author of the work on the 
 Prophecies) is also among the supporters of it. For a 
 full account of the arguments in favour of this opinion, 
 derived both from reason and the express language of 
 Scripture, see Br. Soulhxvood Smith's very interesting 
 work, " On the Divine Government." See also Magee 
 on Atonement, where the doctrine of tlie advocates of 
 Universal Restoration is thus briefly and, I believe, 
 fairly explained : — " Beginning with the existence of an 
 infinitely powerful, wise, and good Being, as the first 
 and fundamental principle of rational religion, they pro- 
 nounce the essence of this Being to be love, and from 
 this infer, as a demonstrable consequence, that none of 
 the creatures formed by such a Being will ever be made 
 
 eternally miserable Since God (they say) would 
 
 act unjustly in inflicting eternal misery for temporary
<#PG# 342>

 
 
 crimes, the sufferings of the wicked can be but remedial, 
 and will terminate in a complete purification from moral 
 disorder, and in their ultimate restoration to virtue and 
 happiness." 
 
 Page 273. — " Fruit of the desert shrub- " — v, Hamil- 
 ton s ^gi/jHiaca. 
 
 Page 278. — " The ivhite garment she wore, and the 
 ring of gold on her finger." — See, for the custom among 
 the early Christians of wearing white for a few days 
 after baptism, Ambros. de Myst. — With respect to the 
 ring, the Bishop of Lincoln says, in his work on Ter- 
 tullian, " The natural inference from these words {Ter- 
 tull. de Pudicitid) appears to be, that a ring used to be 
 given in baptism ; but I have found no other trace of 
 such a custom." 
 
 Page 280. — " Pebbles of jasper. ^^ — v. Clarke. 
 
 lb. — " Stunted marigold," cj-c. — " J-ies Mesembryan- 
 themum nodiflorum et Zygophyllum coccineum, plantes 
 grasses des deserts, rejet^es a cause de leur Acret^ par les 
 chameaux, les ch&vres, et les gazelles." M. Delile upon 
 the plants of Egypt. 
 
 Page 281. — " Antinoc." — v. Savary and Quatremere. 
 
 Page 286. — " / hai^e observed in iny walks." — " Je 
 remarquai avec une reflexion triste, qu'un animal de 
 proie accompagne presque toujours les pas de ce joli et 
 fr61e individu. " 
 
 Page 272. — " Glistened over its silver letters." — The 
 Codex Cottonianus of the New Testament is ^^Titten in 
 silver letters on a purple ground. The Codex Cottonia-
<#PG# 343>

 
 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA UBRARY 
 
 Los Angeles 
 
 This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 
 
 ?n m-am 
 
 50»i-7,'69(N29684)— 0-120
<#PG# 344>

 
 ,UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
 
 AA 000 381220
<#PG# 345>
