 was once a little boy whose name
was not Lewis Carroll. He was chris-
tened Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, in the
parish church of Daresbury, England,
where he was born, on January 27, 1832. A little
out-of-the-way village was Daresbury, a name de-
rived from a word meaning oak, and Daresbury was
certainly famous for its beautiful oaks.
The christening of Baby Charles must have been a
very happy occasion. To begin with, the tiny boy
was the first child of what proved to be a “numer-
ous family," and the officiating clergyman was the
proud papa. The name of Charles had been be-
stowed upon the eldest son for generations of
Dodgsons, who had carried it honorably through
the line, handing it down untarnished to this latest
Charles, in the parish church at Daresbury.
The Dodgsons could doubtless trace their descent
much further back than a great-great-grandfather,
being a race of gentlemen and scholars, but the

me noble patnich he had chas
Rev. Christopher Dodgson, who lived quite a
century before Baby Charles saw the light, is the
earliest ancestor we hear of, and he held a living in
Yorkshire. In those days, a clergyman was de-
pendent upon some noble patron for his living, a
living meaning the parish of which he had charge
and the salary he received for his work, and so
when the Rev. Christopher's eldest son Charles also
took holy orders, he had for his patron the Duke of
Northumberland, who gave him the living of Elsden
in Northumberland, a cold, bleak, barren country.
The Rev. Charles took what fell to his lot with much
philosophy and a saving sense of humor.
He suffered terribly from the cold despite the fact
that he snuggled down between two feather beds in
the big parlor, which was no doubt the best room in
a most uncomfortable house. It was all he could do
to keep from freezing, for the doors were rarely
closed against the winds that howled around them.
The good clergyman was firmly convinced that the
end of the world would come by frost instead of fire.
Even when safely in bed, he never felt quite com-
fortable unless his head was wrapped in three night-
caps, while he twisted a pair of stockings, like a
cravat, around his suffering throat. He generally
wore two shirts at a time, as washing was cheap, and
rarely took off his coat and his boots.
This uncomplaining, jovial clergyman finally re-
ceived his reward. King George III bestowed upon
him the See of Elphin, which means that he was

THE
3
BOY.
made bishop, and had no more hardships to bear.
This gentleman, who was the great-grandfather of
our Charles, had four children; Elizabeth Anne, the
only daughter, married a certain Charles Lutwidge
of Holmrook in Cumberland. There were two sons
who died quite young, and Charles, the eldest,
entered the army and rose to the rank of captain
in the 4th Dragoon Guards. He lost his life in the
performance of a perilous duty, leaving behind him
two sons; Charles, the elder, turned back into the
ways of his ancestors and became a clergyman, and
Hassard, who studied law, had a brilliant career.
This last Charles, in 1830, married his cousin,
Frances Jane Lutwidge, and in 1832 we find him
baptizing another little Charles, in the parish church
at Daresbury, his, eldest son, and consequently his
pride and hope.
The living at Daresbury was the beginning of a
long life of service to the Church. The father of our
Charles rose to be one of the foremost clergymen of
his time, a man of wide learning, of deep piety, and
of great charity, beloved by rich and poor. Though
of somewhat sober nature, in moments of recreation
he could throw off his cares like a boy, delighting
his friends by his wit and humor, and the rare gift
of telling anecdotes, a gift his son inherited in full
measure, long before he took the name of “ Lewis
Carroll,” some twenty years after he was received
into the fold of the parish church at Daresbury.
Little Charles headed the list of eleven young

Dodgsons, and the mother of this infant brigade was
a woman in a thousand. We all know what moth-
ers are; then we can imagine this one, so kind and
gentle that never a harsh word was known to pass
her lips, and may be able to trace her quiet, helpful
influence on the character of our Boy, just as we see
her delicate features reproduced in many of his later
pictures.
A boy must be a poor specimen, indeed, if such a
father and mother could not bring out the best in
him. Saddled as he was, with the responsibility of
being the oldest of eleven, and consequently an ex-
ample held up to younger brothers and sisters,
Charles was grave and serious beyond his years.
Only an eldest child can appreciate what a responsi-
bility this really is. You mustn't do “so and so ”
for fear one of the younger ones might do likewise !
If his parents had not been very remarkable people,
this same Charles might have developed into a vir-
tuous little prig. “Good Brother Charles who
never does wrong ” might have grown into a terrible
bugbear to the other small Dodgsons, had he not
been brimful of fun and humor himself. As it was
he soon became their leader in all their games and
plays, and the quiet parsonage on the glebe farm,
full a mile and a half from even the small traffic of
the village, rang at least with the echoes of laughter
and chatter from these youngsters with strong
healthy lungs. .
We cannot be quite sure whether they were good

children or bad children, for time somehow throws
a halo around childhood, but let us hope they were
“ jes' middlin'.” We cannot bear to think of all
those prim little saints, with ramrods down their
backs, sitting sedately of a Sunday in the family
pew—perhaps it took two family pews to hold them
—with folded hands and pious expressions. We
can't believe these Dodgsons were so silly; they were
reverent little souls doubtless, and probably were
not bad in church, but oh! let us hope they got into
mischief sometimes. There was plenty of room for
it in the big farm parsonage.
“An island farm 'mid seas of corn,
Swayed by the wand'ring breath of morn.
The happy spot where I was born,”
wrote Lewis Carroll many years after, when " Al-
ice in Wonderland ” had made him famous.
Glebe farms were very common in England; they
consisted of large tracts of land surrounding the
parsonage, which the pastor was at liberty to culti-
vate for his own use, or to eke out his often scanty
income, and as the parsonage at Daresbury was com-
paratively small, and the glebe or farm lands fairly
large, we can be sure these boys and girls loved to be
out of doors, and little Charlie at a very early age
began to number some queer companions among his
intimate friends. His small hands burrowing in the
soft, damp earth, brought up squirming, wriggling
things-earthworms, snails, and the like. He made

pets of them, studying their habits in his “small
boy ” way, and having long, serious talks with them,
lying on the ground beside them as they crawled
around him. An ant-hill was to him a tiny town,
and many a long hour the child must have spent
busying himself in their small affairs, settling
imaginary disputes, helping the workers, supplying
provisions in the way of crumbs, and thus early be-
ginning to understand the ways of the woodland
things about which he loved to write in after years.
He had, for boon companions, certain toads, with
whom he held animated conversations, and it is said
that he really taught earthworms the art of war-
fare by supplying them with small pieces of pipe
with which to fight.
He did not, like Hiawatha in the legend, “ Learn
of ev'ry bird its language,” but he invented a lan-
guage of his own, in which no doubt he discoursed
wisely to the toads and snails who had time to listen;
he learned to speak this language quite fluently, so
that in later years when eager children clustered
about him, and with wide eyes and peals of laughter
listened to his nonsense verses, full of the queerest
words they ever heard, they could still understand
from the very tones of his voice exactly what he
meant. Indeed, when little Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson grew up to be Lewis Carroll, he worked
this funny language of his by equally funny rules,
so that, as he said, “a perfectly balanced mind
could understand it.”

Of course, there were other companions for the
Dodgson children-cats and dogs, and horses and
cows, and in the village of Warrington, seven miles
away, there were children to be found of their own
size and age, but Daresbury itself was very lonely.
A canal ran through the far end of the parish, and
here bargemen used to ply to and fro, carrying
produce and fodder to the near-by towns. Mr.
Dodgson took a keen interest in these men who
seemed to have no settled place of worship.
In a quiet, persuasive way he suggested to Sir
Francis Egerton, a large landholder of the country,
that it would be nice to turn one of the barges into
a chapel, describing how it could be done for a hun-
dred pounds, well knowing, clever man, that he was
talking to a most interested listener; for a few
weeks later he received a letter from Sir Francis
telling him that the chapel was ready. In this odd
little church, the first of its kind, Mr. Dodgson
preached every Sunday evening.
But at Daresbury itself life was very monoto-
nous; even the passing of a cart was a great event,
and going away was a great adventure. There was
one never-to-be-forgotten occasion when the family
went off on a holiday jaunt to Beaumaris. Railroads
were then very rare things, so they made the jour-
ney in three days by coach, allowing also three days
for the return trip.
It was great fun traveling in one of those old-time
coaches with all the luggage strapped behind, and all

the bright young faces atop, and four fast-trotting
horses dashing over the ground, and a nice long
holiday with fine summer weather to look forward
to. But in winter, in those days, traveling was a
serious matter; only a favored few could squeeze
into the body of the coach; the others still sat atop,
muffled to the chin, yet numb with the cold, as the
horses went faster and faster, and the wind whistled
by, and one's breath froze on the way. Let us hope
the little Dodgsons went in the summer time.
Daresbury must have been a beautiful place, with
its pleasant walks, its fine meadows, its deep secluded
woods, and best of all, those wonderful oak trees
which the boy loved to climb, and under whose
shade he would lie by the hour, filling his head with
all those quaint fancies which he has since given to
the world. He was a clever little fellow, eager to
learn, and from the first his father superintended his
education, being himself a scholar of very high
order. He had the English idea of sending his
eldest son along the path he himself had trod;
first to a public school, then to Oxford, and finally
into the Church, if the boy had any leaning that
way.
Education in those days began early, and not by
way of the kindergarten; the small boy had scarcely
lost his baby lisp before he was put to the study of
Latin and Greek, and Charles, besides, developed a
passion for mathematics. It is told that when a
very small boy he showed his father a book of loga-

rithms, asking him to explain it, but Mr. Dodgson
mildly though firmly refused.
“You are too young to understand such a diffi-
cult subject,” he replied; "a few years later you
will enjoy the study—wait a while.”
“But," persisted the boy, his mind firmly bent on
obtaining information, please explain.” Whether
the father complied with his request is not recorded,
but we rather believe that explanations were set
aside for the time. Certain it is, they were de-
manded again and again, for the boy soon developed
a wonderful head for figures and signs, a knowledge
which grew with the years, as we shall see later.
When he was still quite a little boy, his mother
and father went to Hull to visit Mrs. Dodgson's
father who had been ill. The children, some five
or six in number—the entire eleven had not yet ar-
rived—were left in the care of an accommodating
aunt, but Charles, being the eldest, received a letter
from his mother in which he took much pride, his
one idea being to keep it out of the clutches of his
little sisters, whose hands were always ready for
mischief. He wrote upon the back of the note, for-
bidding them to touch his property, explaining cun-
ningly that it was covered with slimy pitch, a most
uncomfortable warning, but it was “the ounce of
prevention,” for the letter has been handed down to
us, and a sweet, cheery letter it was, so full of
mother-love and care, and tender pride in the little
brood at home. No wonder he prized it!

This is probably the first letter he ever received,
and it takes very little imagination to picture the im-
portant air with which he carried it about, and the
care with which he hoarded it through all the
years.
There is a dear little picture of our Boy taken
when he was eight years old. Photography was not
yet in use, so this black print of him is the copy of
a silhouette which was the way people had their
“ pictures taken” in those days. It was always a
profile picture, and little Charles's finely shaped
head, with its slightly bulging forehead and delicate
features, stands sharply outlined. We have also a
silhouette of Mrs. Dodgson, and the resemblance be-
tween the two is very marked.
When the boy was eleven, a great change came
into his life. Sir Robert Peel, the famous states-
man, presented to his father the Crown living of
Croft, a Yorkshire village about three miles from
Darlington. A Crown living is always an ex-
ceptionally good one, as it is usually given by royal
favor, and accompanied by a comfortable salary.
Mr. Dodgson was sorry to leave his old parishioners
and the little parsonage where he had seen so much
quiet happiness, but he was glad at the same time,
to get away from the dullness and monotony of
Daresbury. With a growing family of children it
was absolutely necessary to come more into contact
with people, and Croft was a typical, delightful Eng-
lish town, famous even to-day for its baths and

II
medicinal waters. Before Mr. Dodgson's time it
was an important posting-station for the coaches
running between London and Edinburgh, and
boasted of a fine hotel near the rectory, used later
by gentlemen in the hunting season.
Mr. Dodgson's parish consisted not only of Croft
proper, but included the neighboring hamlets of
Halnaby, Dalton and Stapleton, so he was a pretty
busy man going from one to the other, and the little
Dodgsons were busy, too, making new friends and
settling down into their new and commodious
quarters.
The village of Croft is on the river Tees, in fact
it stands on the dividing line between Yorkshire and
Durham. A bridge divides the two counties, and
midway on it is a stone which marks the boundary
line. It was an old custom for certain landholders
to stand on this bridge at the coming of each new
Bishop of Durham, and to present him with an old
sword, with an appropriate address of welcome.
This sword the Bishop returned immediately.
The Tees often overflowed its banks—indeed,
floods were not infrequent in these smiling English
landscape countries, kept so fertile and green by the
tiny streams which intersect them. Two or three
heavy rainfalls will swell the waters, sending them
rushing over the country with enormous force.
Jean Ingelow in her poem “ High Tide on the Coast
of Lincolnshire " paints a vivid picture of the havoc
such a flood may make in a peaceful land:

12
*Where the river, winding down,
Onward floweth to the town.”
But the quaint old church at Croft has doubtless
weathered more than one overflow from the restless
river Tees.
The rectory, a large brick house, with a sloping
tile roof and tall chimneys, stood well back in a very
beautiful garden, filled with all sorts of rare plants,
intersected by winding gravel paths. As in all
English homes, the kitchen garden was a most at-
tractive spot; its high walls were covered with
luxuriant fruit trees, and everybody knows that
English “wall fruit” is the most delicious kind.
The trees are planted very close to the wall, and the
spreading boughs, when they are heavy with the
ripening fruit, are not bent with the weight of it, but
are thoroughly propped and supported by these walls
of solid brick, so the undisturbed fruit comes to a
perfect maturity without any of the accidents which
occur in the ordinary orchard. The garden itself
was bright with kitchen greens, filled with every-
thing needed for household use.
With so much space the little Dodgsons had room
to grow and “multiply” to the full eleven, and fine
times they had with plays and games, usually in-
vented by their clever brother. One of the principal
diversions was a toy railroad with “ stations " built
at various sections of the garden, usually very pretty
and rustic looking, planned and built by Charles

13
himself. He also made a rude train out of a wheel-
barrow, a barrel, and a small truck, and was able to
convey his passengers comfortably from station to
station, exacting fare at each trip.
He was something of a conjurer, too, and in wig
and gown, could amaze his audience for hours with
his inexhaustible supply of tricks. He also made
some quaint-looking marionettes, and a theater for
them to act in, even writing the plays, which were
masterpieces in their way. Once he traced a maze
upon the snow-covered lawn of the rectory.
Mazes were often found in the real old-time gar-
dens of England; they consisted of intersecting paths
bordered by clipped shrubbery and generally ar-
ranged in geometrical designs, very puzzling to the
unwary person who got lost in them, unable to
discover a way out, until by some happy accident
the right path was found. “Threading the Maze "
was a fashionable pastime in the days of the
Tudors; the maze at Hampton Court being one of
the most remarkable of that period.
Charles's early knowledge of mathematics made
his work on the snow-covered lawn all the more re-
markable, for the love of that particular branch of
learning certainly grew with his growth.
Meanwhile, it was a very serious, earnest little
boy, who looked down the long line of Dodgsons,
saying with a choke in his voice: “I must leave you
and this lovely rectory, and this fair, smiling coun-
tryside, and go to school,”

14
He was shy, and the thought struck terror; but
everybody who is anybody in England goes to some
fine public school before becoming an Oxford or a
Cambridge student, and for that reason Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson buried his regrets beneath a
smiling face, bade farewell to his household, and at
the mature age of twelve, armed with enough Greek
and Eatin to have made a dictionary, with a knowl-
edge of mathematics that a college “ don” might
well have envied, set forth to this alluring world
of books and learning.

CHAPTER II.
ITH the removal to Croft, Mr. Dodgson
was brought more and more into promi-
nence; he was appointed examing chap-
lain to the Bishop of Ripon, and finally
he was made Archdeacon of Richmond and one of
the Canons of Ripon Cathedral.
The Grammar School at Richmond was well
known in that section of England. It was under the
rule of a certain Mr. Tate, whose father, Dr. Tate,
had made the school famous some years before, and
it was there that our Boy had his first taste of school
life.
Holidays in those days were not arranged as they
are now, for one of the first letters of Charles, sent
home from Richmond, was dated August 5th; so it
is probable that the term began in midsummer.
This special letter was written to his two eldest sis-
ters and gives an excellent picture of those first
days, when as a “new boy” he suffered at the hands
of his schoolmates. As advanced as he was in Latin
and Greek and mathematics, this letter, for a twelve-
15

16
year-old boy, does not show any remakable progress
in English. The spelling was precise and correct,
but the punctuation was peculiar, to say the least.
Still his description of the school life, when one
overcame the presence of commas and the absence
of periods, presented a vivid picture to the mind.
He tells of the funny tricks the boys played upon
him because he was a "new boy.” One was called
“King of the Cobblers." He was told to sit on the
ground while the boys gathered around him and to
say " Go to work”; immediately they all fell upon
him, and kicked and knocked him about pretty
roughly. Another trick was “ The Red Lion," and
was played in the churchyard; they made a mark on
a tombstone and one of the boys ran toward it with
his finger pointed and eyes shut, trying to see how
near he could get to the mark. When his turn came,
and he walked toward the tombstone, some boy who
stood ready beside it, had his mouth open to bite the
outstretched finger on its way to the mark. He
closes his letter by stating three uncomfortable
things connected with his arrival—the loss of his
toothbrush and his failure to clean his teeth for sev-
eral days in consequence; his inability to find his
blotting-paper, and his lack of a shoe-horn.
The games the Richmond boys played-football,
wrestling, leapfrog and fighting—he slurred over
contemptuously, they held no attraction for him.
A schoolboy or girl of the present day can have
no idea of the discomforts of school life in Charles

Dodgson's time, and the boy whose gentle manners
were the result of sweet home influence and associa-
tion with girls, found the rough ways of the English
schoolboy a constant trial. Strong and active as he
was, he was always up in arms for those weaker and
smaller than himself. Bullying enraged him, and
distasteful as it was, he soon learned the art of using
his fists for the protection of himself and others.
These were the school-days of Nicholas Nickleby,
David Copperfield, and Little Paul Dombey. Of
course, all schoolmasters were not like Squeers or
Creakle, nor all schoolmasters' wives like Mrs.
Squeers, nor indeed all schools like Dotheboys' Hall
or Salem Hall, or Dr. Blimber's cramming establish-
ment, but many of the inconveniences were certainly
prominent in the best schools.
Flogging was considered the surest road to
knowledge; kind, honest, liberal-minded teachers
kept a birch-rod and a ferrule within gripping dis-
tance, and the average schoolboy thus treated like a
little beast, could be pardoned for behaving like one.
In spring or summer the big, bare, comfortless
schoolhouses were all very well, but when the days
grew chill, the small boy shivered on his hard bench
in his draughty corner, and in winter time the
scarcity of fires was trying to ordinary flesh and
blood. The poor unfortunate who rose at six, and
had to fetch and carry his own water from an out-
door pump, or if he had taken the precaution to draw
it the night before, had found it frozen in his

18
pitcher, was not to be blamed if washing was merely
a figure of speech.
Mr. and Mrs. Tate were most considerate to their
boys, and Richmond was a model school of its class.
Charles loved his “ kind old schoolmaster” as he
called him, and he was not alone in this feeling, for
Mr. Tate's influence over the boys was maintained
through the affection and respect they had for him.
Of course he let them “ fight it out” among them-
selves according to the boy-nature; but the earnest
little fellow with the grave face and the eager,
questioning eyes, attracted him greatly, and he
began to study him in his keen, kind way, finding
much to admire and praise in the letters which he
wrote to his father, and predicting for him a bright
career. Admitting that he had found young Dodg-
son superior to other boys, he wisely suggested that
he should never know this fact, but should learn to
love excellence for its own sake, and not for the sake
of excelling.
Charles made quite a name for himself during
those first school days. Mathematics still fascinated
him and Latin grew to be second nature; he stood
finely in both, and while at Richmond he developed
another taste, the love of composition, often con-
tributing to the school magazine. The special story
recorded was called “The Unknown One," but
doubtless many a rhyme and jingle which could be
traced to him found its way into this same little
magazine, not forgetting odd sketches which he be-

gan to do at a very early age. They were all rough,
for the most part grotesque, but full of simple fun
and humor, for the quiet studious schoolboy loved a
joke.
Charles stayed at the Richmond school for three
years; then he took the next step in an English boy's
life, he entered Rugby, one of the great public
schools.
In America, a public school is a school for the
people, where free instruction is given to all alike;
but the English public school is another thing. It
is a school for gentlemen's sons, where tuition fees
are far from small, and “ extras” mount up on the
yearly bills.
Rugby had become a very celebrated school when
the great Dr. Arnold was Head-Master. Up to that
time it was neither so well known nor so popular as
Eton, but Dr. Arnold had governed it so vigorously
that his hand was felt long after his untimely death,
which occurred just four years before Charles was
ready to enter the school. The Head-Master at that
time was, strangely enough, named Tait, spelt a lit-
tle differently from the Richmond schoolmaster.
Dr. Tait, who afterwards became Archbishop of
Canterbury, was a most capable man, who governed
the school for two of the three years that our Boy
was a pupil. The last year, Dr. Goulburn was
Head-Master.
Charles found Rugby a great change from the
quiet of Richmond. He went up in February of

20
1846, the beginning of the second term, when foot-
ball was in full swing. The teams practiced on the
broad open campus known as “Big-side,” and a
"new boy ” could only look on and applaud the
great creatures who led the game. Rugby was
swarming with boys—three hundred at least—from
small fourteen-year-olders of the lowest “ form,” or
class, to those of eighteen or twenty of the fifth and
sixth, the highest forms. They treated little Dodg-
son in their big, burly, schoolboy fashion, hazed
him to their hearts' content when he first entered,
shrugging their shoulders good-naturedly over his
love of study, in preference to the great games of
cricket and football.
To have a fair glimpse of our Boy's life at this
period, some little idea of Rugby and its surround-
ings might serve as a guide. Those who visit the
school to-day, with its pile of modern, convenient,
and ugly architecture, have no conception of what
it was over sixty years ago, and even in 1846 it bore
no resemblance to the original school founded by
one Lawrence Sheriffe,“ citizen and grocer of Lon-
don” during the reign of Henry VIII. To begin
with, it is situated in Shakespeare's own country,
Warwickshire on the Avon River, and that in itself
was enough to rouse the interest of any musing,
bookish boy like Charles Dodgson.
From “Tom Brown's School Days,” that ever
popular book by Thomas Hughes, we may perhaps
understand the feelings of the “new boy” just

passing through the big, imposing school gates, with
the oriel window above, and entering historic
Rugby.
What first struck his view was the great school
field or “close” as they called it, with its famous
elms, and next, “ the long line of gray buildings,
beginning with the chapet and ending with the
schoolhouse, the residence of the Head-Master
where the great flag was lazily waving from the
highest round tower.”
As we follow Tom Brown through his first day,
we can imagine our Boy's sensations when he found
himself in this howling wilderness of boys. The
eye of a boy is as keen as that of a girl regard-
ing dress, and before Tom Brown was allowed to
enter Rugby gates he was taken into the town
and provided with a cat-skin cap, at seven and
sixpence.
“'You see,' said his friend as they strolled up
toward the school gates, in explanation of his con-
duct, “a great deal depends on how a fellow cuts
up at first. If he's got nothing odd about him and
answers straightforward, and holds his head up, he
gets on.'”
Having passed the gates, Tom was taken first to
the matron's room, to deliver up his trunk key, then
on a tour of inspection through the schoolhouse hall
which opened into the quadrangle. This was “a
great room, thirty feet long and eighteen high or
thereabouts, with two great tables running the

22
whole length, and two large fireplaces at the side
with blazing fires in them.”
This hall led into long dark passages with a fire
at the end of each, and this was the hallway upon
which the studies opened.
Now, to Charles Dodgson as well as to Tom
Brown, a study conjured up untold luxury; it was
in truth a “Rugby boy's citadel ” usually six feet
long and four feet broad. It was rather a gloomy
light which came in through the bars and grating of
the one window, but these precautions had to be
taken with the studies on the ground floor, to keep
the small boys from slipping out after “lock-up”
time.
Under the window was usually a wooden table
covered with green baize, a three-legged stool, a
cupboard, and nails for hat and coat. The rest of
the furnishings included “a plain flat-bottom
candlestick with iron extinguisher and snuffers, a
wooden candle-box, a staff-handle brush, leaden ink-
pot, basin and bottle for washing the hands, and a
saucer or gallipot for soap.” There was always a
cotton curtain or a blind before the window. For
such a mansion the Rugby schoolboy paid from ten
to fifteen shillings a year, and the tenant bought his
own furniture. Tom Brown had a “hard-seated
sofa covered with red stuff,” big enough to hold two
in a " tight squeeze," and he had, besides, a good,
stout, wooden chair. Those boys who had looking-
glasses in their rooms were able to comb their own

locks, those who were not so fortunate went to what
was known as the “combing-house" and had it done
for them.
Unfortunately there are recorded very few details
of these school-days at Rugby. We can only con-
jecture, from our knowledge of the boy and his
studious ways, that Charles Dodgson's study was
his castle, his home, and freehold while he was in
the school. He drew around him a circle of friends,
for the somewhat sober lad had the gift of talking,
and could be jolly and entertaining when he liked.
The chapel at Rugby was an unpretentious
Gothic building, very imposing and solemn to little
Dodgson, who had been brought up in a most rever-
ential way, but the Rugbeans viewed it in another
light. Tom Brown's chosen chum explained it to
him in this wise:
“ That's the chapel you see, and there just behind
it is the place for fights; it's most out of the way for
masters, who all live on the other side and don't
come by here after first lesson or callings-over.
That's when the fights come off.”
All this must have shocked the simple, law-
abiding son of a clergyman. It took from four to
six years to tame the average Rugby boy, but little
Charles needed no discipline; he was not a "goody-
goody” boy, he simply had a natural aversion to
rough games and sports. He liked to keep a whole
skin, and his mind clear for his studies; he was fond
of tramping through the woods, or fishing along the

24
banks of the pretty, winding Avon, or rowing up
and down the river, or lying on some grassy slope,
still weaving the many odd fancies which grew into
clearer shape as the years passed. The boys at
Rugby did not know he was a genius, he did not
know it himself, happy little lad, just a bit quiet and
old-fashioned, for the noisy, blustering life about
him. In fact, strange as it may seem, Charles
Dodgson was never really a little boy until he was
quite grown up.
He easily fell in with the routine of the school,
but discipline, even as late as 1846, was hard to
maintain. The Head-Master had his hands full;
there were six under-masters-one for each form-
and special tutors for the boys who required them,
and from the fifth and sixth forms, certain monitors
were selected called “præposters," who were sup-
posed to preserve order among the lower forms. In
reality they bullied the smaller boys, for the system
of fagging was much abused in those days, and the
poor little fags had to be bootblacks, water-carriers,
and general servants to very hard task-masters,
while the “præposter” had little thought of doing
any service for the service he exacted; in fact the
unfortunate fag had to submit in silence to any in-
dignity inflicted by an older boy, for if by chance a
report of such doings came to the ears of the Head-
Master or his associates, the talebearer was “sent to
Coventry,” in other words, he was shunned and left
to himself by all his companions.

always have arse with the son's blood
Injustice like this made little Dodgson's blood
boil; he submitted of course with the other small
boys, but he always had a peculiar distaste for the
life at Rugby. He owned several years later that
none of the studying at Rugby was done from real
love of it, and he specially bewailed the time he lost
in writing out impositions, and he further confessed
that under no consideration would he live over those
three years again.
These “ impositions ” were the hundreds of lines
of Latin or Greek which the boys had to copy out
with their own hands, for the most trifling of-
fenses—a weary and hopeless waste of time, with
little good accomplished.
In spite of many drawbacks, he got on finely with
his work, seldom returning home for the various
holidays without one or more prizes, and we cannot
believe that he was quite outside of all the fun and
frolic of a Rugby schoolboy's life. For instance,
we may be sure that he went bravely through that
terrible ordeal for the newcomer, called “ singing
in Hall.” “Each new boy," we are told, “was
mounted in turn upon a table, a candle in each hand,
and told to sing a song. If he made a false note, a
violent hiss followed, and during the performance
pellets and crusts of bread were thrown at boy or
candles, often knocking them out of his hands and
covering him with tallow. The singing over, he
descended and pledged the house in a bumper of
salt and water, stirred by a tallow candle. He was

then free of the house and retired to his room, feel-
ing very uncomfortable."
“On the night after 'new boys' night' there was
chorus singing, in which solos and quartets of all
sorts were sung, especially old Rugby's favorites
such as:
“It's my delight, on a shiny night
In the season of the year,'
and the proceedings always wound up with ‘God
save the Queen.'"
Guy Fawkes' Day was another well-known
festival at Rugby. There were bonfires in the
town, but they were never kindled until eight
o'clock, which was “lock-up” time for Rugby
school. The boys resented this as it was great fun
and they were out of it, so each year there was a
lively scrimmage between the Rugbeans and the
town, the former bent on kindling the bonfires
before “ lock-up” time, the latter doing all they
could to hold back the ever-pressing enemy.
Victory shifted with the years, from one side to the
other, but the boys had their fun all the same, which
was over half the battle.
Charles must have gone through Rugby with
rapid strides, accomplishing in three years' time
what Tom Brown did in eight, and when he left he
had the proud distinction of being among the very
few who had never gone up a certain winding stair-
case leading, by a small door, into the Master's

private presence, where the rod awaited the culprit,
and a good heavy rod it was.
During these years Dickens was doing his best
work, and while at Rugby, Charles read “ David
Copperfield,” which came out in numbers in the
Penny Magazine. He was specially interested in
Mrs. Gummidge, that mournful, tearful lady, who
was constantly bemoaning that she was “a lone lorn
creetur," and that everything went “contrairy”
with her. Dickens's humor touched a chord of
sympathy in him, and if we go over in our minds,
the weeping animals we know in “ Alice in Wonder-
land” and “ Through the Looking-Glass,” we will
find many excellent portraits of Mrs. Gummidge.
He also read Macaulay's “ History of England,”
and from it was particularly struck by a passage de-
scribing the seven bishops who had signed the invi-
tation to the Pretender. Bishop Compton, one of
the seven, when accused by King James, and asked
whether he or any of his ecclesiastical brethren had
anything to do with it, replied: “I am fully per-
suaded, your Majesty, that there is not one of my
brethren who is not innocent in the matter as my-
self.” This tickled the boy's sense of humor.
Those touches always appealed to him; as he grew
older they took even a firmer hold upon him and he
was quick to pluck a laugh from the heart of things.
His life at Rugby was somewhat of a strain; with
a brain beginning to teem with a thousand fairy
fancies that the boys around him could not appre-

28
ciate, he was forced to thrust them out of sight. He
flung himself into his studies, coming out at exami-
nations on top in mathematics, Latin, and divinity,
and saving that other part of him for his sisters,
when he went home for the holidays.
Meantime he continued to write verses and stories
and to draw clever caricatures. There is one of
these drawings peculiarly Rugbean in character; it
is supposed to be a scene in which four of his sisters
are roughly handling a fifth, because she would
write to her brother when they wished to go to
Halnaby and the Castle. This noble effort he
signed “ Rembrandt.”
The picture is really very funny. The five girls
have very much the appearance of the marionettes
he was fond of making, especially the unfortunate
correspondent who has been pulled into a horizontal
position by the stern sister. The whole story is told
by the expression of the eyes and mouth of each, for
the clever schoolboy had all the secrets of caricature,
without quite enough genius in that direction to
make him an artist.
The Rugby days ended in glory; our Boy, no
longer little. Dodgson, but young Dodgson, came
home loaded with honors. Mr. Mayor, his mathe-
matical master, wrote to his father in 1848, that he
had never had a more promising boy at his age, since
he came to Rugby. Mr. Tait also wrote compli-
menting him most highly not only for his high
standing in mathematics and divinity, but for his

conduct while at Rugby, which was all that could be
desired.
We can now see the dawning of the two great
loves of his life, but there was another love, which
Rugby brought forth in all its beauty and strength,
the love for girls. From that time he became their
champion, their friend, and their comrade; whatever
of youth and of boyhood was in his nature came out
in brilliant flashes in their company. Boys, in his
estimation, had to be, of course—a necessary evil, to ·
be wrestled with and subdued. But girls—God
bless 'em! were girls; that was enough for young
Dodgson to the end of the chapter.

CHAPTER III.
HEN Charles came home on his holi-
day visits, he was undoubtedly the
busiest person at Croft Rectory. We
must remember there were ten eager lit-
tle brothers and sisters who wanted the latest news
from “the front,” meaning Rugby of course, and
Charles found many funny things to tell of the
school doings, many exciting matches to recount,
many a thrilling adventure, and, alas! many a tale
of some popular hero's downfall and disgrace. He
had sketches to show, and verses to read to a most
enthusiastic audience, the girls giggling over his
funny tales, the boys roaring with excitement as in
fancy they pictured the scene at “Big-side " during
some great football scrimmage, for Charles's de-
scriptions were so vivid, indeed he was such a good
talker always, that a few quaint sentences would
throw the whole picture on the canvas.
Vacation time was devoted to literary schemes of
all kinds. From little boyhood until he was way up
in his “teens,” he was the editor of one magazine
30

31
or another of home manufacture, chiefly, indeed, of
his own composition, or drawn from local items
of interest to the young people of Croft Rectory.
While he was still at Richmond School, Useful
and Instructive Poetry was born and died in six
months' time, and many others shared the same
fate; but the young editor was undaunted.
This was the age of small periodicals and he had
caught the craze; it was also the age when great
genius was burning brightly in England. Tennyson
was in his prime; Dickens was writing his stories,
and Macaulay his history of England. There were
many other geniuses who influenced his later years,
Carlyle, Browning and others, but the first three
caught his boyish fancy and were his guides during
those early days of editorship. Punch, the great
English magazine of wit and humor, attracted him
immensely, and many a time his rough drawings
caught the spirit of some of the famous cartoons.
He never imagined, as he laughed over the broad
humor of John Tenniel, that the great cartoonist
would one day stand beside him and share the
honors of “ Alice in Wonderland.”
One of his last private efforts in the editorial line
was The Rectory Umbrella, a magazine undertaken
when he was about seventeen or eighteen years old, .
on the bridge, one might say, between boyhood and
his approaching Oxford days. His mind had de-
veloped quickly, though his views of life did not go
far beyond the rectory grounds. He evidently took

his title out of the umbrella-stand in the rectory
hall, the same stand doubtless which furnished him
with “ The Walking Stick of Destiny," a story of
the lurid, exciting sort, which made his readers' hair
rise. The magazine also contained a series of
sketches supposed to have been copied from paint-
ings by Rembrandt, Sir Joshua Reynolds and oth-
ers whose works hang in the Vernon Gallery. One
specially funny caricature of Sir Joshua Reynolds's
“ Age of Innocence” represents a baby hippopota-
mus smiling serenely under a tree not half big
enough to shade him.
Another sketch ridicules homeopathy and is ex-
tremely funny. Homeopathy is a branch of medi-
cal science which believes in very small doses of
medicine, and this picture represents housekeeping
on a homeopathic plan; a family of six bony
specimens are eating infinitesimal grains of food,
which they can only see through the spectacles they
all wear, and their table talk hovers round millionths
and nonillionths of grains.
But the cleverest poem in The Rectory Umbrella is
the parody on “ Horatius," Macaulay's famous
poem, which is supposed to be a true tale of his
brothers' adventures with an obdurate donkey. It
is the second of the series called “Lays of Sorrow,"
in imitation of Macaulay's “Lays of Ancient
Rome," and the tragedy lies in the sad fact that the
donkey succeeds in getting the better of the boys.
“ Horatius” was a great favorite with budding

33
orators of that day. The Rugby boys declaimed it
on every occasion, and reading it over in these
modern times of peace, one is stirred by the martial
note in it. No wonder boys like Charles Dodgson
loved Macaulay, and it is pretty safe to say that he
must have had it by heart, to have treated it in such
spirited style and with such pure fun. Indeed, fun
bubbled up through everything he wrote; whole-
some, honest fun, which was a safety valve for an
over-serious lad.
This period was his halting time, and the hu-
morous skits he dashed off were done in moments of
recreation. He was mapping out his future in a
methodical way peculiarly his own. Oxford was to
be his goal, divinity and mathematics his principal
studies, and he was working hard for his examina-
tions. The desire of the eldest son to follow in his
father's footsteps was strengthened by his own
natural inclination, for into the boy nature crept a
rare golden streak of piety. The reverence for holy
things was a beautiful trait in his character from
the beginning to the end of his life; it never pushed
itself aggressively to the front, but it sweetened the
whole of his intercourse with people, and was per-
haps the secret of the wonderful power he had with
children.
The intervening months between Rugby and Ox-
ford were also the boundary-line between boyhood
and young manhood, that most important period
when the character shifts into a steadier pose, when

34
the young eyes try vainly to pierce the mists of the
future, and the young heart-throbs are sometimes
very painful. Between those Rugby school-days and
the more serious Oxford ones, something happened
-we know not what—which cast a shadow on our
Boy's life. He was young enough to live it down,
yet old enough to feel keenly whatever sorrow
crossed his path, and as he never married, we
naturally suspect that some unhappy love affair, or
death perhaps, had cut him off from all the joys so
necessary to a young and deep-feeling man. What-
ever it was—and he kept his own secret—it did not
mar the sweetness of his nature, it did not kill his
youth, nor deaden the keen wit which was to make
the world laugh one day. It drew some pathetic
lines upon his face, a wistful touch about mouth and
eyes, as we can see in all his portraits.
A slight reserve hung as a veil between him and
people of his own age, but it opened his heart all the
wider to the children, whose true knight he became
when, as“ Lewis Carroll ” he went forth to conquer
with a laugh. We say “children,” but we mean
"girls." The little boy might just as well have been
a caged animal at the Zoo, for all the notice he in-
spired. Of course, there were some younger
brothers of his own to be considered, but he had such
a generous provision of sisters that he didn't mind,
and then, besides, one's own people are different
somehow; we know well enough we wouldn't
change our brothers and sisters for the finest little

35
paragons that walk. So with Lewis Carroll; he
strongly objected to everybody else's little brothers
but his own, and it is even true that in later years
there were some small nephews and boy cousins, to
whom he was extremely kind. But as yet there is
no Lewis Carroll, only a grave and earnest Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson, reading hard to enter Christ
Church, Oxford, that grand old edifice steeped in
history, where his own father had " blazed a trail.”
Mathematics absorbed many hours of each day,
and Latin and Greek were quite as important.
English as a “course” was not thought of as it is
to-day; the classics were before everything else,
although ancient and modern history came into use.
For lighter reading, Dickens was a never-failing
source of supply. All during this holiday period
“ David Copperfield ” was coming out in monthly
instalments, and though the hero was “ only a boy,”
there was something in the pathetic figure of lonely
little David, irresistibly appealing to the young fel-
low who hated oppression and injustice of any kind,
and was always on the side of the weak. While the
dainty picture of Little Em’ly might have been his
favorite, he was keenly alive to the absurdities of
Mrs. Gummidge, the doglike devotion of Peggotty,
and the horrors of the “cheap school," which turned
out little shivering cowards instead of wholesome
hearty English boys.
Later on, he visited the spot on which Dickens had
founded Dotheboys Hall in “ Nicholas Nickleby.”

36
“Barnard's Castle” was a most desolate region in
Yorkshire. He tells of a trip by coach, over a land
of dreary hills, into Bowes, a Godforsaken village
where the original of Dotheboys Hall was still
standing, though in a very dilapidated state, actually
falling to pieces. As we well know, after the writ-
ing of “ Nicholas Nickleby,” government authori-
ties began to look into the condition of the “ cheap
schools” and to remedy some of the evils. Even
the more expensive schools, where the tired little
brains were crammed to the brim until the springs
were worn out and the minds were gone, were ex-
posed by the great novelist when he wrote “ Dom-
bey and Son” and told of Dr. Blimber's school,
where poor little Paul studied until his head grew
too heavy for his fragile body. The victims of
these three schools—David, Smike, and Little Paul
-twined themselves about the heartstrings of the
thoughtful young student, and many a humorous bit
besides, in the works of Lewis Carroll, bears a de-
cided flavor of those dips into Dickens.
Macaulay furnished a more solid background in
the reading line. His history, such a complete
chronicle of England from the fall of the Stuarts to
the reign of Victoria, appealed strongly to the patri-
otism of the English boy, and the fact that Macau-
lay was not only a writer of English history, but
at the same time a maker of history, served to
strengthen this feeling.
If we compare the life of Lord Macaulay with

37
the life of Lewis Carroll, we will see that there was
something strangely alike about them. Both were
unmarried, living alone, but with strong family ties
which softened their lives and kept them from
becoming crusty old bachelors. It is very probable,
indeed, that the younger man modeled his life
somewhat along the lines of the older, whom he
greatly admired. Both were parts of great institu-
tions; Macaulay stood out from the background of
Parliament, as Lewis Carroll did from Oxford or
more particularly Christ Church, and both names
shone more brilliantly outside the routine of daily
life.
But the influence that crept closer to the heart of
this boy was that of Tennyson. The great poet
with the wonderful dark face, the piercing eyes, the
shaggy mane, sending forth clarion messages to the
world in waves of song, was the inspiration of many
a quaint phrase and poetic turn of thought which
came from the pen of Lewis Carroll. For Tenny-
son became to him a thing of flesh and blood, a
friend, and many a pleasant hour was spent in the
poet's home in later years, when the fame of
“ Alice” had stirred his ambition to do other things.
Many a verse of real poetry could trace its origin to
association with the great man, who was quick to
discover that there were depths in the soul of his
young friend where genius dwelt.
Meantime Charles Dodgson read his poems over
and over, in the seclusion of Croft Rectory, during

38
that quiet pause in his life before he went up to
Oxford.
There was a village school of some importance in
Croft, and members of the Dodgson family were in-
terested in its welfare, often lending a hand with
the teaching, and during those months, no doubt,
Charles took his turn. For society, his own family
seemed to be sufficient. If he had any boy friends,
there are no records of their intercourse; indeed, the
only friend mentioned is T. Vere Bayne, who in
childish days was his playfellow and who later be-
came, like himself, a Student of Christ Church. This
association cemented a lasting friendship. One or
two Rugbeans claimed some intimacy, but his true
friendships were formed when Lewis Carroll grew
up and really became young.
Walking was always a favorite pastime; the
woods were full of the things he loved, the wild
things whose life stirred in the rustling of the leaves
or the crackle of a twig, as some tiny animal whisked
by. The squirrels were friendly, the hares lifted up
their long ears, stared at him and scurried out of
sight. Turtles and snails came out of the river to
sun themselves on the banks; the air was full of the
hum of insects and the chirp of birds.
As he lay under the friendly shelter of some great
tree, he thought of this tree as a refuge for the teem-
ing life about it; the beauty of its foliage, its spread-
ing branches, were as nothing to its convenience as
a home for the birds and chipmunks and the burrow-

39
ing things that lived beneath its roots or in the hol-
lows of its trunk.
These creatures became real companions in time.
He studied their ways and habits, he looked them
up in the Natural History, and noting their peculi-
arities, tucked them away in that quaint cupboard
of his which he called his memory.
How many things were to come out of that cup-
board in later days! He himself did not know what
was hidden there. It reminded one of a chest which
only a special key could open, and he did not even
know there was a key, until on a certain " golden
afternoon” he found it floating on the surface of the
river. He grasped it, thrust it into the rusty lock,
and lo!—but dear me, we are going too far ahead,
for that is quite another chapter, and we have left
Charles Dodgson lying under a tree, watching the
lizards and snails and ants at their work or play,
weaving his quaint fancies, dreaming perhaps, or
chatting with some little sister or other who chanced
to be with him. There was always a sister to chat
with, which in part accounted for his liking for
girls.
So, through a long vista of years, we have the
picture of our Boy, between eighteen and nineteen,
when he was about to put boyhood by forever and
enter the stately ranks of the Oxford undergradu-
ates. As he stands before us now, young, ardent,
hopeful, and inexperienced, we can see no glimmer
of the fairy wand which turned him into a wizard.

40
We see only a boy, somewhat old for his years,
very manly in his ways, with a well-formed head, on
which the clustering dark hair grew thick; a sensi-
tive mouth and deep blue eyes, full of expression.
He was clever, imitative, and consequently a good
actor in the little plays he wrote and dramatized; he
was very shy, but at his best in the home circle. He
enjoyed nothing so much as an argument, always
holding his ground with great obstinacy; a fine stu-
dent, frank and affectionate, brimful of wit and
humor, fond of reading, with a quiet determination
to excel in whatever he undertook. With such
weapons he was well equipped to “storm the cit-
adel” at Oxford.
On May 23, 1850, he went up to matriculate—that
is, to register his name and go through some exam-
inations and the formality of becoming a student.
Christ Church was to be his college, as it had been
his father's before him. Archdeacon Dodgson was
much gratified by the many letters he received con-
gratulating him on the fact that he had a son worthy
to succeed him, for he was well remembered in the
college, where he had left a brilliant record behind
him.
It certainly sounds a little queer to have the name
of a church attached to one of the colleges of a uni-
versity, but our colleges in America are compara-
tively so new that we cannot grasp the vastness and
the antiquity of the great English universities.
Under the shelter of Oxford, and covering an area
*ea

41
of at least five miles, twenty colleges or more were
grouped, each one a community in itself, and all
under the rule of the Chancellor of Oxford. Christ
Church received as students those most interested
in the divinity courses, though in other respects the
undergraduates could take up whatever studies they
pleased, and Charles Dodgson put most of his
energy into mathematics and the necessary study of
the classics.
Seven months intervened between his matricula-
tion and his real entrance into Oxford; these seven
months we have just reviewed, full of study and
pleasant family associations, with youthful experi-
ments in literature, full of promise for the future-
and something deeper still—which must have
touched him just here," where the brook and river
meet.”
Into all our lives at some time or other comes a
solemn silence; it may spring from many causes,
from a joy which cannot be spoken, or from a sor-
row too deep for utterance, but it comes, and we
cover it gently and hide it away, as something too
sacred for the common light of every day.
This was the silence which came to Lewis Carroll
on the threshold of his career; but lusty youth was
with him as he stood before the portal of a brilliant
future, and there was courage and high hope in his
heart as he knocked for entrance.

CHAPTER IV.
N January 24, 1851, just three days be-
fore his nineteenth birthday, Charles
Dodgson took up his residence at Christ
Church, and from that time to the day of
his death his name was always associated with the
fine old building which was his Alma Mater. The
men of Christ Church called it the “ House," and
were very proud of their college, as well they might
be, for Oxford could not boast of a more imposing
structure. There is a great difference between a
university and a college. A university is great
enough to shelter many colleges, and its chancellor
is ruler over all. When we reflect that Christ
Church College, alone, included as many important
buildings as are to be found in some of our modern
American universities, we may have some idea of
the extent of Oxford University, within whose
boundaries twenty such colleges could be counted.
Their names were all familiar to the young fellow,
and many a time, in those early days, he could be
found in his boat upon the river, floating gently
42

43
down stream, the whole panorama of Oxford spread
out before him.
“Now rising o'er the level plain,
'Mid academic groves enshrined.
The Gothic tower, the Grecian fane,
Ascend in solemn state combined.”
The spire of St. Aldates (pronounced St. Olds);
Sir Christopher Wren's domed tower over the
entrance to Christ Church; the spires of the Cathe-
dral of St. Mary; the tower of All Saints; the twin
towers of All Souls; the dome of Radcliffe Library;
the massive tower of Merton, and the beautiful pin-
nacles of Magdalen, all passed before him, “rising
o'er the level plain" as the verse puts it, backed by
dense foliage, and sharply outlined against the blue
horizon.
History springs up with every step one takes in
Oxford. The University can trace its origin to the
time of Alfred the Great. Beginning with only
three colleges, each year this great center of learning
became more important. Henry I built the Palace
of Beaumont at Oxford, because he wished frequent
opportunities to talk with men of learning. It was
from the Castle of Oxford that the Empress Maud
escaped at dead of night, in a white gown, over the
snow and the frozen river, when Stephen usurped
the throne. It was in the Palace of Beaumont that
Richard the Lion-Hearted was born, and so on,
through the centuries, great deeds and great events
could be traced to the very gates of Oxford.

44
But most of all, the young student's affections
centered around Christ Church, and indeed, for the
first few years of his college life, he had little oc-
casion to go outside of its broad boundaries unless
for a row upon the river.
Christ Church really owes its foundation to
the famous Cardinal Wolsey. Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson had its history by heart; how the wicked
old prelate, wishing to leave behind him a monument
of lasting good to cover his many misdeeds, ob-
tained the royal license to found the college as early
as 1525; how, in 1529, as Shakespeare said, he bade
“a long farewell to all his greatness," and his pos-
sessions, including Cardinal College as it was then
called, fell into the ruthless hands of Henry VIII;
and how, after many ups and downs, the present
foundation of Christ Church was created under
“ letters patent of Henry VIII dated November 4,
1546.”
Christ Church, with its imposing front of four
hundred feet, is built around the Great Quadrangle,
quite famous in the history of the college. It in-
cludes in the embrace of its four sides the library
and picture gallery, the Cathedral and the Chapter
House, and the homes of the dean and his associates.
There was another smaller quadrangle called Peck-
water Quadrangle, where young Dodgson had his
rooms when he first entered college, but later when
he became a tutor or a “don” as the instructors
were usually called, he moved into the Great Quad-

45
rangle. A beautiful meadow lies beyond the south
gate, spreading out in a long and fertile stretch to
the river's edge.
The massive front gate has towers and turrets on
either side, while just above it is the great “ Tom
Tower," the present home of “Tom” the famous
bell, measuring over seven feet in diameter and
weighing over seven tons. This bell was originally
dedicated to St. Thomas of Canterbury, and bore a
Latin inscription in praise of the saint. It was
brought from the famous Abbey of Oseney, when
that cloister was transferred to Oxford, and on the
accession of Queen Mary, the ruling dean rechris-
tened it Mary, out of compliment to her; but this
was not a lasting change; “ Tom” was indeed the
favored name. After “ Bonnie Prince Charlie”
came into his own, and Christopher Wren's tower
was completed, the great bell was moved to the new
resting place, where it rang first on the anniversary
of the Restoration, May 29, 1684, and since then
has rung each morning and evening, at the opening
and closing of the college gates.
“ Tom Tower," as it is called, overlooks that por-
tion of the Great Quadrangle popularly known as
“ Tom Quad,” and it was in this corner of the
Great Quadrangle that Lewis Carroll had his rooms.
He speaks of it often in his many reminiscences, as
he also spoke of the new bell tower over the hall
staircase in the southeast corner. This new tower
was built to hold the twelve bells which form the

46
famous Christ Church peal, some twenty years after
his entrance as an undergraduate. This, and the
new entrance to the cathedral from “ Tom Quad,”
were designed by the architect, George Bodley, and
Lewis Carroll, who was then a very dignified and
retiring “don," ridiculed his work in a clever little
booklet called “The Vision of the Three T's.”
In it he calls the new tower the “Tea-chest,” the
passage to the cathedral the “ Trench," the entrance
itself the “ Tunnel ” ( here we have the three T's).
The architect, whose initials are G. B., he thinly
disguises as “ Jeeby," and his disapproval is ex-
pressed through “Our Willie," meaning William
E. Gladstone, who gives vent to his rage in this
fashion:
“For as I'm true knight, a fouler sight,
I'd never live to see.
Before I'd be the ruffian dark,
Who planned this ghastly show,
I'd serve as secretary's clerk (pronounced clark]
To Ayrton or to Lowe.
Before I'd own the loathly thing,
That Christ Church Quad reveals,
I'd serve as shoeblack's underling
To Odger and to Beales. "
But no thought of ridicule entered the earnest
young scholar's mind during those early days at
Oxford. Everything he saw in his surroundings
was most impressive. There was much about the
college routine to remind hit the old Rugor

47
days. Indeed, it was not so very long before his
time that the birch-rod was laid aside in Oxford;
the rules were still very strict, and the student was
forced to work hard to gain any standing what-
ever.
Young Dodgson went into his studies, as he did
into everything else, with his whole soul. He de-
voted a great deal of his time to mathematics, and
quite as much to divinity, but just as he had settled
down for months of serious work, the news of his
mother's sudden death sent him hurrying back to
Croft Rectory to join the sorrowing household. It
was a terrible blow to them all; with this young
family growing up around her, she could ill be
spared, and the loss of her filled those first Oxford
days with dark shadows for the boy—he was only
a boy still for all his nineteen years—and we can
imagine how deeply he mourned for his mother.
What we know of her is very faint and shadowy.
That her influence was keenly felt for many years,
we can only glean from the love and reverence with
which the memory of her was guarded; for this
English home hid its grief in the depths of its heart,
and only the privileged few might enter and console.
This was the first and only break in the family for
many years. Charles went back to Oxford im-
mediately after the funeral, and took up his studies
again with redoubled zeal.
Thomas Gaisford was dean of Christ Church
during the four years that Charles Dodgson was an

undergraduate. He was a most able man, well
known as scholar, writer, and thinker, but he died,
much lamented, in 1855, just as the young student
was thinking seriously of a life devoted to his
college. George Henry Liddell came into residence
as dean of Christ Church, an office which he held
for nearly forty years, and as Dean Liddell stood
for a great deal in the life of Charles Dodgson, we
shall hear much of him from time to time, dating
more especially from the comradeship of his three
little daughters, who were the first “ really truly "
friends of Lewis Carroll.
But we are jumping over too many years at once,
and must go back a few steps. His hard study dur-
ing the first year won him a Boulter scholarship;
the next year he took First Class honors in mathe-
matics, and a second in classical studies, and on
Christmas Eve, 1852, he was made a Student of
Christ Church College.
To become a Student of Christ Church was not
only a great honor, conferred only on one altogether
worthy of it, but it was a very serious step in life
for a young man. A Student remained unmarried
and always took Holy Orders; he was of course
compelled to be very regular at chapel service, and
to be devoted, heart and soul, to the interests of
Christ Church, all of which this special young Stu- .
dent had no difficulty in following to the letter.
From that time forth he ordered his life as he
planned his mathematics, clearly and simply, and

49
once his career was settled, Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson dropped from his young shoulders—he
was only twenty-the mantle of over-seriousness,
and looked about for young companionship. He
found what he needed in the households of the mas-
ters and the tutors, whose homes looked out upon
the Great Quadrangle. Here on sunny days the
nurses brought the children for an airing; chubby
little boys in long trousers and “roundabouts,"
dainty little girls, with corkscrew ringlets and long
pantalets and muslin “ frocks” and poke bonnets,
in the depths of which were hidden the rosebud
faces. These were the favorites of the young Stu-
dent, whose slim figure in cap and gown was often
the center of an animated group of tiny girls; one
on his lap, one perhaps on his shoulder, several at
his knee, while he told them stories of the animals
he knew, and drew funny little pictures on stray bits
of paper. The “roundabouts” went to the wall:
they were only boys!”
His coming was always hailed with delight.
Sometimes he would take them for a stroll, always
full of wonder and interest to the children, for alone,
with these chosen friends of his, his natural shyness
left him, the sensitive mouth took smiling curves,
the deep blue eyes were full of laughter, and he
spun story after story for them in his quaint way,
filling their little heads with odd fancies which would
never have been there but for him. The “bunnies”
held animated conversations with these small maids;

50
every chirp and twitter of the birds grew to mean
something to them. He took them across the
meadow, and showed them the turtles swimming on
the river bank; sometimes even-oh, treat of treats!
-he took them in his boat, and pulling gently down
the pretty rippling stream, told them stories of the
shining fish they could see darting here and there in
its depths, and of wonderful creatures they could
not see, who would not show themselves while cu-
rious little girls were staring into the water.
These were hours of pure recreation for him.
The small girls could not know what genuine pleas-
ure they gave; the young undergraduates could
never understand his lack of sympathy with their
many sports. Athletics never appealed to him, even
boating he enjoyed in his own mild way; a quiet pull
up or down the river, a shady bank, an hour's rest
under the trees, a companion perhaps, generally
some small girl, whose round-eyed interest inspired
some remarkable tale—this was what he liked best.
On other days a tramp of miles gave just the exer-
cise he needed.
His busy day began at a quarter past six, with
breakfast at seven, and chapel at eight. Then came
the day's lectures in Greek and Latin, mathematics,
divinity, and the classics.
Meals were served to the undergraduates in the
Hall. The men were divided into “ messes ” just as
in military posts; each “mess” consisted of about
six men, who were served at a small table. There

SI
were many such tables scattered over the Hall, a
vast and ancient room, completed at the time of
Wolsey's fall, 1529, an interesting spot full of me-
morials of Henry VIII and Wolsey. The great
west window with its two rows of shields, some
with a Cardinal's hat, others with the royal arms of
Henry VIII, is most interesting, while the wainscot-
ing, decorated with shields also arranged in orderly
fashion, is very attractive. The Hall is filled with
portraits of celebrities, from Henry VIII, Wolsey
and Elizabeth to the many students, and famous
deans, who have added luster to Christ Church.
In Charles Dodgson's time, the meals were poorly
served. The Hall was lighted at night with candles
in brass candlesticks made to hold three lights each.
The undergraduates were served on pewter plates,
and the poor young fellows were in the hands of
the cook and butler, and consequently were cheated
up to their eyes. They did not complain in Charles
Dodgson's time, but after he graduated and became
a master himself he no doubt took part in what was
known as the “ Bread and Butter" campaign, when
the undergraduates rose up in a body and settled the
cook and butler for all time, appointing a steward
who could overlook the doings of those below in the
kitchen.
This kitchen is a very wonderful old place, the
first portion of Wolsey's work to be completed, and
so strongly was it built, and so well has it lasted,
that it seems scarcely to have been touched by time.
in brass The Hall wars time, the

52
Of course there are some modern improvements,
but the great ranges are still there, and the wide fire-
place and spits worked by a “smoke jack.” Wolsey's
own gridiron hangs just above the fireplace, a large
uncouth affair, fit for cooking the huge hunks of
meat the Cardinal liked best. .
We must not imagine that the years at Oxford
were “all work and no play,” for Charles Dodgson's
many vacations were spent either at home, where his
father made much of him, his brothers looked up to
him, and his sisters petted and spoiled him, or on
little trips of interest and amusement.
Once, during what is known as the “ Long Vaca-
tion," he visited London at the time of the Great
Exhibition, and wrote a vivid letter of description
to his sister Elizabeth. What seemed to interest him
most was the vastness of everything he saw, the huge
crystal fountain and the colossal statues on either
side of the central aisle. One statue he particularly
noticed. It was called the “ Amazon and the Tiger,"
and many of us have doubtless seen the picture, the
strong, erect, girlish figure on horseback, and the
tiger clinging to the horse, his teeth buried in his
neck, the girl's face full of terror, the horse rearing
with fright and pain. He always liked anything
that told a story, either in statues or in pictures,
and in after years, when he became a skilled pho-
tographer, he was fond of taking his many girl-
friends in costume, for somehow it always suggested
a story.

53
ght, an
of Cho the most
He was also very fond of the theater, and he
made many a trip to London to see a special play.
Shakespeare was his delight, and “Henry VIII”
was certainly the most appropriate play for a Stu-
dent of Christ Church College to see. The great
actor, Charles Kean, took the part of Cardinal
Wolsey, and Mrs. Kean shone forth as poor Queen
Katharine, the discarded wife of Henry VIII.
What impressed him most was the vision of the
sleeping queen, the troops of floating angels with
palm branches in their hands, which they waved
slowly over her, while shafts of light fell upon them
from above. Then as the Queen awoke they van-
ished, and raising her arms she called “Spirits of
peace, where are ye?” Poor Queen, no wonder her
audience shed tears! Henry VIII was not an easy
man to get along with, even in his sweetest mood!
In 1854, Charles Dodgson began hard study for
final examinations, working sometimes as many as
thirteen hours a day during the last three weeks,
but the subjects which he had to prepare were
philosophy and history, neither of which were
special favorites, and though he passed fairly well,
his name was not among the first.
During the following Long Vacation he went to
Whitby, where he prepared for final examination
in mathematics, and so well did he work that he took
First Class honors and became quite a distinguished
personage among the undergraduates. His prowess
in so difficult a subject traveled even beyond the

college walls, and congratulations poured in upon
him until he laughingly declared that if he had shot
the Dean there could not have been more commo-
tion. This meant a great deal to him; to begin
with, he stood head on the list of five very able men
who were close to him in the marking. He came
out number 279 and the lowest of the five was 213,
so it was a hard fight in a hard subject, and Lewis
Carroll might be forgiven for a little quiet "brag-
ging" in the letter he wrote his father, telling the
result of the examinations. Of one thing he was
now quite sure—a future lectureship in Christ
Church College.
On December 18, 1854, he graduated, taking the
degree of Bachelor of Arts, and the following year,
October 15, 1855, to celebrate the appointment of
Dean Liddell, he was made a “Master of the
House," meaning that under the roof of Christ
Church College he had all the privileges of a Master
of Arts, which is the next higher degree; but he did
not become a Master of Arts in the University
until two years later. When a college graduate puts
B.A. after his name, we know that means Bachelor
of Arts, the first college degree, and M.A. means
Master of Arts, the second degree.
The young Student was glad to be free of college
restraint and to begin work. Archdeacon Dodgson
was not a rich man, and though his son had never
faced the trials of poverty, he was anxious to become
independent. Now that the “ grinding ” study was

55
over, his thoughts turned fondly to a literary life.
His numerous clever sketches, too, gave him hope of
better work hereafter, and this we know had been
his dream through his boyish years; it was his dream
still, but where his talent would lie he had no idea,
though hazy poems and queer jumbles of words
popped into his mind on the slightest notice. Still he
could not settle down seriously to such work just at
first; there was other work at hand and he must
learn to wait. During the first year of tutorship
he took many private pupils, besides lecturing in
mathematics, his chosen profession, from three to
three and a half hours a day. The next year he
was one of the regular lecturers, and often lectured
seven hours a day, not counting the time it took him
to prepare his work.
Mathematicians are born, not made; this young
fellow had not only the power of solving problems,
but the rare gift of being able to teach others to
solve them also, and many a student has been heard
to declare that mathematics was never a dull study
with Mr. Dodgson to explain. We can imagine the
slight, youthful figure of the young college “don,”
his clean-cut, refined face, full of light and interest,
his blue eyes flashing as he tackled some difficult
problem, wrestled with it before his class in the
lecture-hall, and undid the tangle without the slight-
est trouble.
He“ took to " problems as naturally as a duck to
water; the harder they were the more resolutely he

56
bent to his task. Sometimes the tussle kept him
awake half the night, often he was up at dawn to
renew the battle, but he usually “won out,” and
this is what made him so good a teacher-he never
“ let go." Whatever mathematical ax he had to
grind, he always managed to put a keen edge upon
it sooner or later.
To his many friends, especially his many girl
friends, this side of his character was most remark-
able. How this fun-making, fun-loving, story-tell-
ing nonsense rhymer could turn in a twinkling into
the grave, precise “don” and discourse on rec-
tangles, and polygons, and parallel lines, and un-
known quantities was more than they could under-
stand.
Girls, the best of them, the rarest and finest of
them, are not, as a rule, fond of mathematics, They
"take” it in school, as they "take" whooping
cough and measles at home, but in those days they
seldom went further than the “first steps " in
plain arithmetic. Girls, especially the little girls of
Charles Dodgson's immediate circle, rarely went to
school; they were usually in the care of governesses
who helped them along the narrow path of learning
which they themselves had trod, and these little
maids could truly say, with all their hearts:
“ Multiplication is vexation,
Division is as bad,
The Rule of Three, it puzzles me,
And Fractions drive me mad!”

57
It was certainly thought quite unnecessary to edu-
cate girls in higher mathematics; those were not the
days when colleges for girls were thought of. The
little daughters of the wise Oxford men were con-
sidered finely grounded if they had mastered the
three R's—(“Reading, 'Riting, and 'Rithmetic”).
and the young “ don” knew pretty well how far
they were led along these paths, for if we remember
our “ Alice in Wonderland ” we may easily recall
that interesting conversation between Alice, the
Mock Turtle and the Gryphon, about schools, the
Mock Turtle remarking with a sigh:
“I took only the regular course."
“What was that?” inquired Alice.
“Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin
with," the Mock Turtle replied, “and then the dif-
ferent branches of Arithmetic-Ambition, Distrac-
tion, Uglification, and Derision."
“What else had you to learn?” asks Alice
later on.
“Well, there was Mystery," the Mock Turtle re-
plied, counting off the subjects on his flappers,
“Mystery-ancient and modern-with Seography;
then Drawling—the Drawling-master was an old
Conger-eel that used to come once a week; he taught
us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.”
[Drawing, sketching, and painting in oils.] Lewis
Carroll loved this play upon words.
“What was that like?” said Alice.
“Well, I can't show it you myself," the Mock

58
Turtle said, “ I'm too stiff. And the Gryphon never
learnt it.”
“ Hadn't time," said the Gryphon. “I went to
the Classical master though. He was an old Crab,
he was.”
“I never went to him," the Mock Turtle said,
with a sigh; "he taught Laughing and Grief, they
used to say."
“So he did, so he did," said the Gryphon, sighing
in his turn, and both creatures hid their faces in their
paws.
It is doubtful if any little girl in Lewis Carroll's
time ever learned “ Laughing and Grief” unless
she was very ambitious, but many a quick, active
young mind absorbed the simple problems which he
was constantly turning into games for them.
So the years passed over the head of this young
Student of Christ Church. They were pleasantly
broken by long vacations at Croft Rectory, by trips
through the beautiful English country, by one
special journey to the English lakes, where Words-
worth, Southey, and Coleridge lived and wrote their
poems. These trips were often afoot, and Charles
Dodgson was very proud of the long distances he
could tramp, no matter what the wind or the
weather. There was nothing he liked better unless
it was the occasional visits he made to the Princess's
Theatre in London.
On June 16, 1856, he records seeing “ A Winter's
Tale,” where he was specially pleased with little

59
Ellen Terry, a beautiful tiny creature, who played
the child's part of Mamillius in the most charming
way. This was the first of many meetings with the
famous actress, who became one of his child-friends
in later years. But that was when he was Lewis
Carroll. As yet he was only Charles Dodgson, a
struggling young Student, anxious for independ-
ence, interested in his work, simple, sincere, devout,
a dreamer of dreams which had not yet taken shape,
and above all, a true lover of little girls, no matter
how plain, or fretful, or rumpled, or even dirty. His
kindly eyes could see beneath the creases on the top,
his gentle fingers clasped the shrinking, trembling
little hands; his low voice charmed them all un-
consciously, and no doubt the children he loved did
for him as much as he did for them. If he felt the
strain of overwork nothing soothed him like a romp
with his favorites, and young as he was, when
dreaming of the future and the magic circle in
which he would write his name, it was not of the
great world he was thinking, but of bright young
faces, with dancing eyes and sunny curls, and eager
voices continually demanding—“One more story.”

CHAPTER V.

E have traveled over the years with some
speed, from the time that little Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson was christened by
his proud papa to the moment when the
same proud father heard that his eldest son was
made a student of Christ College—a good large
slice out of a birthday-cake-twenty candles—if
one counts birthdays by candles. It's a charming
old German fashion, for the older one grows the
brighter the lights become, and if you chance to get
real old—a fine “ threescore and ten ”—why, if
there's a candle for each year, there you are in a
perfect blaze of glory!
We have just passed over the very oldest part of
our Boy's life; from the time he became Lewis
Carroll, Charles Dodgson began to go backward; he
did a lot of things backward, as we shall see later.
He wrote letters backward, he told stories backward,
he spelled and counted backward—in fact, he was
so fond of doing things backward we do not wonder
that he stepped out from the circle of the years, and

61
turned backward to find the boyhood he had some-
how missed before. This is when Lewis Carroll
was born; but that is a story in itself.
· Outwardly the life of the young Student seemed
unchanged, but that is all we mortals know about it;
the fairies were already at work. In moments of
leisure little poems went forth to the world—a world
which at first consisted of Croft Rectory—for there
was another and last family magazine, of which he
was sole editor and composer. He named it Misch-
Masch, a curious old German word, which in our
English means Hodge-Podge, and everybody, young
and old, knows what a jumble Hodge-Podge is—
something like New England succotash.
Misch-Masch was started by this enterprising
young editor during the year after his graduation.
He had become a person of vast experience between
Misch-Masch and the days of The Rectory Um-
brella, having been editor of College Rhymes, his
college paper. He also wrote stories for the
Oxonian Advertiser and the Whitby Gazette, and
this printed matter, together with many new and
original ideas and drawings, found a place in his
new home venture.
His mathematical genius blossomed forth in a
wonderful labyrinth or maze, a geometrical design
within a given square form, of a tangle of intersect-
ing lines and angles containing a hidden pathway.
to the center. These designs, that seem so remark-
able to outsiders, were very simple to the editor of

62
Misch-Masch, who was always inventing puzzles
of some sort.
He also wrote a series of “ Studies from the
English Poets,” which he illustrated himself. One
specially good drawing was of the following line
from one of Keats's poems. “She did so—but 'tis
doubtful how or whence.” The picture represents
a very fat old lady, with a capitally drawn placid
face, perched on a post marked “Dangerous," seem-
ingly in midwater. In her chubby hand is a basket
with the long neck of a goose hanging out.
Mr. Stuart Collingwood, Lewis Carroll's nephew,
gives a most interesting account of these early edi-
torial efforts, in an article written for the Strand, an
English magazine. Speaking of the above illustra-
tion he says:
“Keats is the author whom our artist has hon-
ored, and surely the shade of that much neglected
songster owes something to a picture which must
popularize one passage at least in his works.
“ The only way I can account for the lady's haz-
ardous position is by supposing her to have at-
tempted to cross a frozen lake after a thaw has set
in. The goose, whose long neck projects from her
basket, proves that she has just returned from mar-
ket; probably the route across the lake was her
shortest way home. We are to suppose that for
some time she proceeded without any knowledge
of the risk she was running, when suddenly she felt
the ice giving way under her. By frantic exertions

63
she succeeded in reaching the notice-board, to which
she clung for days and nights together, till the ice
was all melted and a deluge of rain caused the water
to rise so many feet that at last she was compelled
for dear life to climb to the top of the post.” We
can now understand how well the illustration fits in
with the line:
“She did so, but 'tis doubtful how or whence.”
Mr. Collingwood continues :
“ Whether she sustained life by eating raw goose
is uncertain. At least she did not follow Father
William's example by devouring the beak. The
question naturally suggests itself: Why was she
not rescued? My answer is that either such a dense
fog enveloped the whole neighborhood that even her
bulky form was invisible, or that she was so un-
popular a character that each man feared the hatred
of the rest if he should go to her succor.”
Mr. Collingwood concludes his article with the
following riddle which the renowned editor of
Misch-Masch presented to his readers; there must
be an answer, and it is therefore worth while guess-
ing, for Lewis Carroll would never have written a
riddle without one:
A monument, men all agree-
Am I in all sincerity;
Half-cat, half-hindrance made
If head and tail removed shall be
Then, most of all you strengthen me.
Replace my head—the stand you see
On which my tail is laid,

Misch-Masch had a short but brilliant career, for
magazines with a wider circulation than Croft
Rectory began to claim his attention. The Comic
Times was a small periodical very much on the order
of Punch. Edmund Yates was the editor, and
among the writers and artists were some of the best
known in England. Charles Dodgson's poetry and
sketches were too clever to hide themselves from
public view, and he became a regular contributor.
Later, The Comic Times changed hands, and the old
staff started a new magazine called The Train, in
1856, and the quiet Oxford “don” found his poetry
in such demand that after talking it over with the
editor, he decided to adopt a suitable pen name.
He first suggested “Dares" in compliment to his
birthplace, Daresbury, but the editor preferred a
real name. Then he took his first two names,
Charles Lutwidge, and transposing them he got two
names, Edgar Cuthwellis or Edgar U. C. Westhill,
neither of which sounded in the least interesting.
Finally he decided to take the two names and look
at them backward—this very queer young fellow al-
ways preferred to look at things backward-Lut-
widge Charles. That was certainly not promising.
Then he took one name at a time and analyzed it in
his own quaint way. Lutwidge was surely derived
from the Latin word Ludovicus—which in good
sound English meant Lewis-ah, that was not bad!
Now for Charles. Its Latin equivalent was Carolus
—which could be easily changed in Carroll. The

65
whole thing worked out like one of his own word
puzzles, and Lewis Carroll he was, henceforth,
whenever he made his appearance in print.
There was not much ceremony at this christening.
Just two clever men put their heads together and
the result was—Lewis Carroll! Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson retired to his rooms at Christ Church Col-
lege, where he prepared his lectures on mathematics
and wrote the most learned text-books for the Uni-
versity; but Lewis Carroll peeped out into the world,
which he found full of light and laughter and happy
childhood, and as Lewis Carroll he was known to
that world henceforth.
The first poem to appear with his new name was
called “The Path of Roses," a very solemn, serious
poem about half a yard long and not specially in-
teresting, save as a contribution to a most interesting
little paper. The Train was really very ambitious,
full, indeed, of the best talent of the day. There
were short stories and serials, poems, timely articles,
jokes, puns, anecdates—in short, all the attractions
that help toward the making of an attractive maga-
zine, and though the illustrations were nothing but
old-fashioned woodcuts, the reading was quite as
good, and in many cases better than what we find
in the average magazine of to-day.
Many of the little poems Lewis Carroll wrote at
this time he tucked away in some cubby-hole and
made use of later in one or the other of his books.
One of his very earliest printed bits is called :

66
MY FANCY.
I painted her a gushing thing,
With years perhaps a score,
I little thought to find they were
At least a dozen more.
My fancy gave her eyes of blue,
A curly auburn head;
I came to find the blue—a green,
The auburn turned to red.
She boxed my ears this morning,
They tingled very much;
I own that I could wish her
A somewhat lighter touch.
And if you were to ask me how
Her charms might be improved,
I would not have them added to,
But just a few removed !
She has the bear's ethereal grace,
The bland hyena's laugh,
The footstep of the elephant,
The neck of the giraffe;
I love her still, believe me,
Tho' my heart its passion hides-
“ She is all my fancy painted her,"
But, oh-how much besides!
The quoted line—“She is all my fancy painted
her"—is the line upon which he built the poem; he
was very fond of doing this, and though no special
mention is made of the fact, it is highly probable
that these three telling verses found their way into

67
Misch-Masch, among the “ Studies from the Poets."
It is unfortunate, too, that we have not some funny
drawing of this wonderful “ gushing thing” of the
giraffe neck, “the bear's ethereal grace," and the
“ footstep of the elephant,” for Lewis Carroll's
drawings generally followed his thoughts; a pencil
and bit of paper were always ready in some inner
pocket, for illustrating purposes, and it is doubtful
if any celebrated artist could produce more sketches
on such a variety of subjects. His power to make
his pencil “ talk” impressed his sisters and brothers
greatly; they caught every scrap of paper that flut-
tered from his hands, treasured it, and if the draw-
ing was distinct enough, they colored it with cray-
ons or touched it up in black and white, for the use
of The Rectory Umbrella and the later publication
of Misch-Masch. In his secret soul he longed to be
an artist; he certainly possessed genius of a queer
sort. A few strokes would tell the story, usually a
funny one or a quaint one, but all his art failed to
make his people look quite real or natural-just
dolls stuffed with sawdust. But they were fine cari-
catures, and the young artist had to content himself
with this smaller talent.
The Train published many of his poems during
1856–57. “ Solitude," “ Novelty and Romance-
ment,” “ The Three Voices,” followed one another
in quick succession, but the best of all was decidedly
“ Hiawatha's Photographing," and this for more
reasons than one. In the first place, from the time

he went into residence at Christ Church photog-
raphy was his great delight; he “ took” people
whenever he could-canons, deacons, deans, stu-
dents, undergraduates and children. The “grown-
ups” submitted with a gentle sort of patience, but
he made his camera such a point of attraction for
the youngsters that he could “ take " them as often
as he liked, and he has left behind him a wonderful
array of photographs, many of well-known, even
celebrated people, among whom we may find Ten-
nyson, the Rossetti family, Ellen and Kate Terry,
John Ruskin, George Macdonald, Charlotte M.
Yonge, Sir John Millais, and many others known
to fame; and considering that photography had not
reached its present perfection, Lewis Carroll's pho-
tographs show remarkable skill. He would not
have been Lewis Carroll if he had not gone into this
fascinating pastime with his whole soul. When-
ever he met a new face which interested him, we
may be sure it was not long before the busy camera
was at work. There is no doubt that his admiring
family suffered agonies in posing, to say nothing of
his friends who were not always beautiful enough
to produce “ pretty pictures ”; their criticisms were
often based entirely on their disappointment: hence
the poem,

69
1
HIAWATHA'S PHOTOGRAPHING.
[With no apology to Mr. Longfellow.]
From his shoulder Hiawatha
Took the camera of rosewood,
Made of sliding, folding rosewood;
Neatly put it all together,
In its case it lay compactly,
Folded into nearly nothing;
But he opened out the hinges,
Pushed and pulled the joints and hinges
Till it looked all squares and oblongs,
Like a complicated figure
In the second book of Euclid.
This he perched upon a tripod-
Crouched beneath its dusky cover-
Stretched his hand, enforcing silence
Said, “ Be motionless, I beg you!”
Mystic, awful was the process.
All the family in order
Sat before him for their pictures :
Each in turn, as he was taken,
Volunteered his own suggestions,
His ingenious suggestions.
All of which during the course of the poem suc-
ceeded in driving poor Hiawatha to the verge of
madness, until -
Finally my Hiawatha
Tumbled all the tribe together
(“ Grouped ” is not the right expression),
And, as happy chance would have it,

Did at last obtain a picture
Where the faces all succeeded:
Each came out a perfect likeness.
Then they joined and all abused it,
Unrestrainedly abused it,
As “the worst and ugliest picture
They could possibly have dreamed of.”
All together rang their voices,
Angry, loud, discordant voices,
As of dogs that howl in concert,
As of cats that wail in chorus.
But my Hiawatha's patience,
His politeness and his patience,
Unaccountably had vanished,
And he left that happy party.
Neither did he leave them slowly,
With the calm deliberation,
The intense deliberation,
Of a photographic artist:
But he left them in a hurry,
Left them in a mighty hurry,
Stating that he would not stand it,
Stating in emphatic language
What he'd be before he'd stand it.
Hurriedly he packed his boxes:
Hurriedly the porter trundled
On a barrow all his boxes:
Hurriedly he took his ticket:
Hurriedly the train received him:
Thus departed Hiawatha.

71
But perhaps the cleverest part of the poem is the
seemingly innocent paragraph of introduction which
reads as follows:
“In an age of imitation, I can claim no special
merit for this slight attempt at doing what is known
to be so easy. Any fairly practiced writer, with
the slightest ear for rhythm, could compose, for
hours together, in the easy running meter of 'The
Song of Hiawatha. Having, then, distinctly stated
that I challenge no attention in the following little
poem to its merely verbal jingle, I must beg the can-
did reader to confine his criticism to its treatment
of the subject.”
Notice how metrically this sounds. Tune up to
the Hiawatha pitch and you will have the same
swinging measure in the above sentences.
Lewis Carroll's real acquaintance with Tennyson
began in that eventful year of 1856. The odd,
shaggy man, with the fine head and the keen, rest-
less eyes, fascinated the young Student greatly. He
went often to Tennyson's home and did his best to
be interested in the poet's two little boys, Hallam
and Lionel. Had they been girls there would have
been no difficulty, but he always had strained re-
lations with boys; still, as these “roundabouts”
belonged to the little Tennysons, we find a sort of
armed truce kept up between them. He bargained
with Lionel to exchange manuscripts, and he got
both boys to sign their names in his album; he
even condescended to play a game of chess with

72
Lionel, checkmating him in six moves, but he dis-
tinctly refused to allow that young gentleman to
give him a blow on the head with a mallet in ex-
change for some of his verses. However, we may
be pretty sure that Lewis Carroll's visits to the
Tennysons were much pleasanter when the “round-
abouts ” were not visible.
That same year he made the acquaintance of
John Ruskin, and the great art critic turned out to
be a very valuable friend, as was also Sir James
Paget, the eminent surgeon, who gave him many
hints on medicine and surgery, in which Charles
Dodgson was deeply interested. His medical
knowledge was quite remarkable, and the books he
collected on the subject would have been valuable
additions to any physician's library. In the year
1857 he met Thackeray, who had come to Oxford
to deliver his lecture on George III, and liked him
very much. The Oxford “dons” were certainly
fortunate in meeting all the “great ones " and see-
ing them generally at their best.
The year 1858 was an uneventful year; college
routine varied by much reading, afternoons on the
river or in the country, and evenings devoted to
preparations for the morrow's work. Lewis Car-
roll kept a diary which harbored many fine
thoughts and noble resolves, many doubts and fears,
many hopes, many plans for the future, for he was
making up his mind to the final step in the life of
a Christ Church Student that of taking Holy

Orders, in other words, of being ordained as a
clergyman.
There were one or two points to be considered:
first, regarding an impediment in his speech which
would make constant preaching almost impossible.
He stammered, not on all occasions, but quite
enough to make steady speaking an effort, painful
to himself and his hearers. The other objection
lay in the fact that Christ Church had rigid laws
for its clergy concerning amusements. Charles
Dodgson had no wish to be shut out of the world;
he was fond of theaters and operas, and he did not
see that he was doing any special good to his fel-
low-creatures by putting them out of his life. But
at last, after battling with his conscience, and ear-
nest consultation with a few wise friends, he decided
that he would be ordained, though he would not
become a regular preaching clergyman.
It took him two years to reach this decision, for
he was slow to act on such occasions, but strong of
purpose when the step was taken. On October 17,
1859, the young Prince of Wales (the late King
Edward VII) came into residence at Christ Church
College. This was a mark of special favor to Dean
Liddell, who had for many years been chaplain to
Queen Victoria and her husband, the Prince Con-
sort. Of course there was much ceremony attend-
ing the arrival of his Royal Highness; the Dean
went in person to the station to meet him, and all
the “dons” were drawn up in a body in Tom

74
Quadrangle to give him the proper sort of greeting.
“Hiawatha " had his camera along—“ in its case it
lay compactly,” but his poor little Highness had
been “served up” on the camera to his utter dis-
gust, and nothing would induce him to be photo-
graphed.
Later in the season, the Queen, the Prince Con-
sort, and several princes and princesses came up to
Oxford and surprised everybody. Christ Church
was certainly in a flutter, and the day was turned
into a gala occasion. There was a brilliant recep-
tion that evening at Dean Liddell's and tableaux
vivants, to which we may be sure our modest
Lewis Carroll gave much assistance. He was al-
ready on intimate terms with the three little Lid-
dells, Lorina, Alice, and Edith, and as the children
were to pose in a tableau, he was certainly there to
help and suggest with a score of quaint ideas.
He had a pleasant talk with the Prince of Wales,
who shook hands cordially and condescended to ask
several questions of the young photographer, prais-
ing the photographs which he had seen, and prom-
ised to choose some for himself some day. He re-
garded the pleasant-looking, chatty young fellow
as just one of the college “ dons ”; he had never
even heard of Lewis Carroll, indeed that gentle-
man was too newly born to be known very well
anywhere outside of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson's
study, and it is extremely doubtful if the grave Stu-
dent himself knew of half the fun and merriment

75
hidden away in the new name. As a result of his
interview with the prince, Lewis Carroll obtained
his autograph, which was quite a gem among his
collection.
There is no doubt he had many fine autographs
and also an album, as he mentions several times.
Autograph-hunting was not carried to the excess
that it was later on, and is to-day. It is, to put it
mildly, a very bad habit. Total strangers have no
hesitancy in asking this favor of celebrities, who,
as a rule, object to the wholesale signing of their
names.
But the signatures in Lewis Carroll's album were
those of friends, which was quite another matter,
and it was consequently most interesting to turn
the leaves of the precious volume, and see in what
friendly esteem he was held by the foremost men
and women of his time. To him a letter or a sen-
timent would have had no meaning nor value if not
addressed personally to himself; whereas, the auto-
graph fiend of the present day would be content
with the signature no matter to whom addressed.
Lewis Carroll suffered from these pests in later
years, as well as from the photograph fiend, to him
as malicious as a hornet, and from whom he fled
in terror.
Yet we find many good pictures of him, notwith-
standing, the one which we have chosen for our
frontispiece being the youngest and most attrac-
tive Lewis Carroll at the age of twenty-three.

76
There is another taken some two years later, when
the dignity of the Oxford “don” set well on the
slim young figure. His face was always curiously
youthful in expression: the eyes, deep blue, looked
childlike in their innocent trust; a child had but to
gaze into their depths and claim a friend. Little
girls, particularly, remembered their beauty, for
they felt a thrill at their youthful heartstrings when
those eyes, brimful of kindliness, turned upon them
and warmed their childish souls. They were quick
to feel the gentle pressure of his hand, his touch
upon their shoulders or on their heads, which drew
these little magnets close to his side where he loved
to have them, for behind the shyness and reserve
of Lewis Carroll was a great wealth of tenderness
and love which only his girl friends understood,
because it was only to them that he cared to show
this part of himself.
Of course in his own home this side of him ex-
panded in the sunny companionship of seven
younger sisters. Naturally they did not look upon
him with the awe of the later generation, but they
brought to the surface many winning characteris-
tics which might never have come to light but for
them.
It had been his delight from early boyhood to
tackle problems and to solve them; the “girl prob-
lem " he had studied from the very beginning, in
all its stages, and so it is small wonder that he
knew girls quite as well as he did mathematics, and

77
loved them even better, if the truth must be told,
though they were often quite as puzzling.
On December 22, 1861, in spite of many doubts
and misgivings as to his worthiness, Charles Dodg-
son was ordained deacon by the Bishop of Oxford.
He did this partly from his duty as a Student of
Christ Church, but more because of the influence
it would give him among the undergraduates,
whose welfare he had so much at heart. He
preached often but he never became a regular of-
ficiating clergyman, and his sermons were always
delightful because they were never what we call
“preachy.”
He was so truly good and religious, his faith
was so simple, his desire to do right was so unfail-
ing, that in spite of the slight drawback in his
speech he had the gift of impressing his hearers
deeply. His sermons were dedicated to the service
of God, and he was content if they bore good fruit;
he did not care what people said about them. He
often preached at the evening service for the col-
lege servants; but most of all he loved to preach to
children, to see the earnest young faces upturned
to him, to feel that they were following each word.
It was then that he put his whole heart into the
task before him; the light grew in his eyes, he for-
got to stammer, forgot everything, save the young
souls he was leading, in his eagerness to show them
the way.
Such was the character of Lewis Carroll up to

78
the year 1862, that momentous year in which he
found the golden key of Fairyland. He had often
peeped through the closed gates but he had never
been able to squeeze through; he might have
jumped over them, but that is forbidden in Fairy-
land, where everything happens in the most natural
way.
He had succeeded beyond his hopes in his efforts
for independence; he was establishing a brilliant
record as a mathematical lecturer; he had several
scholarships which paid him a small yearly sum,
and he was also sublibrarian. His little poems
were making their way into public notice and his
more serious work had been “Notes on the First
Two Books of Euclid,” “ Text-Books on Plane Ge-
ometry and Plane Trigonometry,” and “ Notes on
the First Part of Algebra.”
Socially, the retiring “ don” was scarcely known
beyond the University. He ran up to London
whenever the theaters offered anything tempting;
he visited the studios of well-known artists, who
were all fond of him, and he cultivated the friend-
ship of men of learning and letters. If these gen-
tlemen happened to have attractive little daughters,
he cultivated their acquaintance also. One special
anecdote we have of a visit to the studio of Mr.
Munroe, where he found two of the children of
George Macdonald, the author of many books,
among them “At the Back of the North Wind,”
a most charming fairy tale. These two children,

79
a boy and a girl, instantly made friends with Lewis
Carroll, who suggested to the boy, Greville, that he
thought a marble head would be such a useful
thing, much better than a real one because it would
not have to be brushed and combed. This ap-
pealed to the small boy, whose long hair was a tor-
ment, but after consideration he decided that a
marble head would not be able to speak, and it was
better to have his hair pulled and be able to cry out.
In the case of the general small boy Lewis Carroll
preferred marble, but he was overruled. Mr.
Macdonald's two daughters, Lily and Mary, were,
however, great favorites of his; indeed, his girl
friends were rapidly multiplying. Sometimes they
came to see him in the pleasant rooms at Christ
Church College, which were full of curious things
that children love. Sometimes they had tea with
him or went for a stroll, for Oxford had many
beautiful walks about her colleges.
A visit to him was always a great event, but per-
haps those who enjoyed him most were his inti-
mates in “Tom Quadrangle.” The three little
Liddell girls were at that time his special favorites;
their bright companionship brought forth the many
sides of his genius; under the spell of their win-
some chatter the long golden afternoon would
glide happily by, while under his spell they would
sit for hours listening to the wonder tales he spun
for them.

CHAPTER VI.
ALICE.
E generally speak of Oxford-on-the-
Thames. Indeed, if we were to jour-
ney by water from London to Oxford,
we would certainly go by way of the
Thames, and a pleasant journey that would be, too,
gliding between well-wooded, fertile shores with
charming landscape towns on either side and bits
of history peeping out in unexpected places. But
into the heart of Oxford itself the Thames sends
forth its tributaries in opposite directions; the
Isis on one side, the Cherwell on the other. The
Cherwell is what is called a “canoe river," the Isis
is the race course of Oxford, where all the “ eights”
(every racing crew consists of eight men) come
to practice for the great day and the great race,
which takes place sometimes at Henley, sometimes
at Oxford itself, when the Isis is gay with bunting
and flags.
On one side of Christ Church Meadow is a long
line of barges which have been made stationary
80

and which are used as boathouses by the various
college clubs; these are situated just below what
is known as Folly Bridge, a name familiar to all
Oxford men, and the goal of many pleasant trips.
The original bridge was destroyed in 1779, but
tradition tells us that the first bridge was capped by
a tower which was the study or observatory of
Roger Bacon, the Franciscan Friar who invented
the telescope, gunpowder, and many other things
unknown to the people of his time. It was even
hinted that he had cunningly built this tower that
it might fall instantly on anyone passing beneath it
who proved to be more learned than himself. One
could see it from Christ Church Meadow, and
doubtless Lewis Carroll pointed it out to his small
companions, as they strolled across to the water's
edge, where perhaps a boat rocked lazily at its
moorings.
It was the work of a moment to steady it so that
the eager youngsters could scramble in, then he
stepped in himself, pushing off with his oar, and a
few long, steady strokes brought them in mid-
stream. This was an ordinary afternoon occur-
rence, and the children alone knew the delights of
being the chosen companions of Lewis Carroll.
He would let them row, while he would lounge
among the cushions and “spin yarns ” that brought
peals of merry laughter that rippled over the sur-
face of the water. He knew by heart every story
and tradition of Oxford, from the time the Romans

82
reduced it from a city of some importance to a
mere “ ford for oxen to pass over,” which, indeed,
was the origin of its name, long before the Chris-
(tian era.
He had a story or a legend about every place
they passed, but most of all they loved the stories
he “made up" as he went along. He had a low,
well-pitched voice, with the delightful trick of
dropping it in moments of profound interest, some-
times stopping altogether and closing his eyes in
pretended sleep, when his listeners were truly
thrilled. This, of course, produced a stampede,
which he enjoyed immensely, and sometimes he
would “wake up,” take the oars himself, and pull
for some green shady nook that loomed invitingly
in the distance; here they would land and under
the friendly trees they would have their tea, per-
haps, and then they might induce him to finish the
story—if they were ever so good.
It was on just such an occasion that he chanced
to find the golden key to Wonderland. The time
was midsummer, the place on the way up the river
toward Godstow Bridge; the company consisted
of three winsome little girls, Lorina, Alice, and
Edith Liddell, or Prima, Secunda, and Tertia, as
he called them by number in Latin. He tells of
this himself in the following dainty poem—the in-
troduction to “ Alice in Wonderland":

All in the golden afternoon
Full leisurely we glide;
For both our oars, with little skill,
By little arms are plied,
While little hands make vain pretence
Our wanderings to guide.
Ah, cruel Three! In such an hour,
Beneath such dreamy weather,
To beg a tale, of breath too weak
To stir the tiniest feather!
Yet what can one poor voice avail
Against three tongues together?
Imperious Prima flashes forth
Her edict “to begin it”-
In gentler tone Secunda hopes
“ There will be nonsense in it”-
While Tertia interrupts the tale,
Not more than once a minute.
Anon, to sudden silence won,
In fancy they pursue
The dream-child moving through a land
Of wonders wild and new,
In friendly chat with bird or beast-
And half believe it true.
And ever as the story drained
The wells of fancy dry, .
And faintly strove that weary one
To put the subject by,
“ The rest next time "_“It is next time!”
The happy voices cry.

SA.
Thus grew the tale of Wonderland:
Thus slowly one by one,
Its quaint events were hammered out-
And now the tale is done,
And home we steer, a merry crew,
Beneath the setting sun.
Alice! a childish story take,
And with a gentle hand
Lay it where Childhood's dreams are twined
In Memory's mystic band,
Like pilgrims' withered wreath of flowers
Plucked in a far-off land.
It was a very hot day, the fourth of July, 1862,
that this special little picnic party set out for its
trip up the river. Godstow Bridge was a quaint
old-fashioned structure of three arches. In the
very middle it was broken by a tiny wooded island,
and guarding the east end was a picturesque inn
called The Trout. Through the middle arch they
could catch a distant glimpse of Oxford, with
Christ Church spire quite plainly to be seen. They
had often gone as far as the bridge and had their
tea in the ruins of the old nunnery near by, a spot
known to history as the burial-place of Fair Rosa-
mond, that beautiful lady who was supposed to have
been poisoned by Queen Eleanor, the jealous wife
of Henry II. But this day the sun streamed down
on the little party so pitilessly that they landed in
a cool, green meadow and took refuge under a hay-
rick. Lewis Carroll stretched himself out at full

length in the protecting shade, while the expectant
little girls grouped themselves about him.
“Now begin it,” demanded Lorina, who was
called Prima in the poem. Secunda [Alice] prob-
ably knew the story-teller pretty well when she
asked for nonsense, while tiny Tertia, the young-
est, simply clamored for “more, more, more," as
the speaker's breath gave out.
Now, as Lewis Carroll lay there, a thousand odd
fancies elbowing one another in his active brain,
his hands groping in the soft moist earth about
him, his fingers suddenly closed over that magic
Golden Key. It was a queer invisible key, just the
kind that fairies use, and neither Lorina, Alice, nor
Edith would have been able to find it if they had
hunted ever so long. He must have found it on
the water and brought it ashore quite by accident,
for there was the gleam of sunlight still upon it,
and it was very shady under the hayrick. Perhaps
there was a door somewhere that the key might fit;
but no, there was only the hayrick towering above
him, and only the brown earth stretching all about
him. Perhaps a white rabbit did whisk by, per-
haps the real Alice really fell asleep, at any rate
when Prima said “ Begin it," that is how he
started. The Golden Key opened the brown earth
-in popped the white rabbit-down dropped the
sleeping Alice-down-down-down—and while
she was falling, clutching at things on the way,
Lewis Carroll turned, with one of his rare sweet

86
smiles, to the eager trio and began the story of
“ Alice's Adventures Underground.”
The whole of that long afternoon he held the
children spellbound. He did not finish the story
during that one sitting. Summer has many long
days, and the quiet, prudent young “ don " was not
reckless enough to scatter all his treasures at once;
and, besides, all the queer things that happened to
Alice would have lost half their interest in the shad-
ow of a hayrick, and how could one conjure up Mock
Turtles and Lorys and Gryphons on the dry land ?
Lewis Carroll's own recollection of the beginning
of “ Alice” is certainly dated from that “golden
afternoon ” in the boat, and any idea of publishing
the web of nonsense he was weaving never crossed
his mind. Indeed, if he could have imagined that
his small audience of three would grow to be as
many millions in the years to come, the book would
have lost half its charm, and the real child that lay
hidden under the cap and gown of this grave young
Student of thirty might never have been known to
the world.
Into his mind, with all the freshness of unbid-
den thought, popped this story of Alice and her
strange adventures, and while he chose the name
of Alice in seeming carelessness, there is no doubt
that the little maid who originally owned the name
had many points in common with the Rev. Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson, never suspected save by the
two most concerned.

To begin with, the real Alice had an Imagina-
tion; any child who demands nonsense in a story
has an Imagination. Nothing was too impossible
or absurd to put into a story, for one could always
“make believe" it was something else you see, and
a constant “ make believe ” made everything seem
quite real. Dearly as he loved this posy of small
girls, Lewis Carroll could not help being just the
least bit partial to Alice, because, as he himself
might have quaintly expressed it, she understood
everything he said, even before he said it.
She was a dear little round, chubby child, a great
camera favorite and consequently a frequent visitor
to his rooms, for he took her picture on all occa-
sions. One, as a beggar child, has become quite fa-
mous. She is pictured standing, with her ragged
dress slipping from her shoulders and her right
hand held as if begging for pennies; the other hand
rests upon her hip, and her head is bent in a meek
fashion; but the mouth has a roguish curve, and
there is just the shadow of a laugh in the dark eyes,
for of course it's only “make believe,” and no one
knows it better than Alice herself. Lewis Carroll
liked the little bit of acting she did in this trifling
part. A child's acting always appealed to him, and
many of his youngest and best friends were regu-
larly on the stage.
He took another picture of the children perched
upon a sofa; Lorina in the center, a little sister
nestling close to her on either side, making a pretty

88
pyramid of the three dark heads. Yet in studying
the faces one can understand why it was Alice who
inspired him. Lorina's eyes are looking straight
ahead, but the lids are dropped with a little con-
scious air, as if the business of having one's pic-
ture taken was a very serious matter, to say noth-
ing of the responsibility of keeping two small
sisters in order. Edith is staring the camera out
of countenance, uncertain whether to laugh or to
frown, a pretty child with curls drooping over her
face; but Alice, with the elf-locks and the straight
heavy “bang,” is looking far away with those
wonderful eyes of hers; perhaps she was even then
thinking of Wonderland, perhaps even then a light
flashed from her to Lewis Carroll in the shape of
a promise to take her there some day. At any rate,
if it hadn't been for Alice there would have been
no Wonderland, and without Wonderland, child-
hood is but a tale half-told, and even to this day,
nearly fifty years since that “golden afternoon,"
every little girl bearing the name of Alice who has
read the book and has anything of an imagination,
firmly believes that she is the sole and only Alice
who could venture into Lewis Carroll's Wonder-
land.
After he had told the story and the original Alice
had expressed her approval, he promised to write
it out for her to keep. Of course this took time,
because, in the first place, his writing was not quite
plain enough for a child to read easily, so every

y
letter was carefully printed. Then the illustrations
were troublesome, and he drew as many as he
could, consulting a book on natural history for
the correct forms of the queer animals Alice found.
The Mock Turtle was his own invention, for there
never was such an animal on land or sea.
This book was handed over to the small Alice,
who little dreamed at that time of the treasure she
was to have in her keeping. Over twenty years
later, when Alice had become Mrs. Reginald Har-
greaves, the great popularity of “ Alice in Won-
derland” tempted the publishers to bring out a re-
production of the original manuscript. This could
not be done without borrowing the precious vol-
ume from the original Alice, who was willing to
trust it in the hands of her old friend, knowing how
over-careful he would be, and, as he resolved that
he would not allow any workman to touch it, he
had some funny experiences.
To reproduce a book it must first be photo-
graphed, and of course Lewis Carroll consulted an
expert. He offered to bring the book to London,
to go daily to his studio and hold it in position to
be photographed, turning over the pages one by
one, but the photographer wished to do all that
himself. Finally, a man was found who was will-
ing to come to Oxford and do the work in Lewis
Carroll's own way, while he stood near by turning
over the pages himself rather than let him touch
them.

90
The photographer succeeded in getting a fine set
of negatives, and in October, 1880, Lewis Carroll
sent the book in safe custody back to its owner,
thinking his troubles were over. The next step
was to have plates made from the pictures, and
these plates in turn could pass into print. The
photographer was prompt at first in delivering the
plates as they were made, but, finally, like the
Baker in “ The Hunting of the Snark,” he “softly
and suddenly vanished away,” holding still twenty-
two of the fine blocks on which the plates were
made, leaving the book so far-incomplete.
There ensued a lively search for the missing pho-
tographer. This lasted for months, thereby delay-
ing the publication of the book, which was due
Christmas. Then, as suddenly as he had disap-
peared, he reappeared like a ghost at the publish-
ers, left eight of the twenty-two zinc blocks, and
again vanished. Finally, when a year had passed
and poor Lewis Carroll, at his wits' end, had re-
solved to borrow the book again in order to photo-
graph the remaining fourteen pages, the man was
frightened by threats of arrest, and delivered up
the fourteen negatives which he had not yet trans-
ferred to the blocks.
The distracted author was glad to find them,
even though he had to pay a second time for get-
ting the blocks done properly. However, the book
was finished in time for the Christmas sale of 1886,
just twenty-one years after “ Alice” made her first

bow, and the best thing about it was that all the
profits were given to the Children's Hospitals and
Convalescent Homes for Sick Children. It was
thoroughly illustrated with thirty-seven of the au-
thor's own drawings, and the grown-up “ Alice"
received a beautiful special copy bound in white
vellum; but pretty as it was, it could not take the
place of that other volume carefully written out for
the sole pleasure of one little girl. Nothing was
too much trouble if it succeeded in giving pleasure
to any little girl whom Lewis Carroll knew and
loved; even those he did not really know, and con-
sequently could not love, he sought to please, just
because they were “ little girls.”
Alice was among the chosen few who retained his
friendship through the years. She was his first
favorite, and she was indirectly the source of his
good luck, and we may be sure there was a certain
winsomeness about her long after the elf-locks were
gathered into decorous coils of dark hair.
True, the formal old bachelor came forward in
their later association, and the numerous letters he
wrote her always began “My dear Mrs. Har-
greaves,” but his fondness for her outlived many
other passing affections.
To go back to the little Alice and the fair smiling
river, and that wizard Lewis Carroll, who told the
wonder tales so long ago. Once the children had a
taste of “ Alice,” she grew to be a great favorite;
sometimes a chapter was told on the river, some-

92
times in his study, often in the garden or after tea
in Christ Church Meadows in fact, wherever they
caught a glimpse of the grave young man in cap
and gown, the trio of small Liddells fell upon him,
and in this fashion, as he tells us himself, “ the
quaint events were hammered out.”
When he presented the promised copy it might
have passed forever from his mind, which was full
of the higher mathematics he was teaching to the
young men of Christ Church, but he chanced one
day to show the manuscript to George Macdonald,
the well-known writer, who was so charmed with
it that he advised his friend to send it to a publisher.
He accordingly carried it to London, and Macmil-
lan & Co. took it at once. This was a great sur-
prise. He never dreamed of his nonsense being con-
sidered seriously, and growing suddenly about as
young as a great, big, bashful boy, he refused to al-
low his own rough illustrations to appear in print,
so he hunted over the long list of his artist friends,
for the genius who could best illustrate the adven-
tures of his dream-child. At last his friend, Tom
Taylor, a well-known dramatist, suggested Mr.
Tenniel, the clever cartoonist for Punch, who was
quite willing to undertake this rather odd bit of
work, and on July 4, 1865, exactly three years since
that memorable afternoon, Alice Liddell received
the first printed copy of “ Alice in Wonderland,” the
name the author finally selected for his book.
His first idea, as we know, was “ Alice's Adven-

tures Underground,” the second was " Alice's Hour
in Elfland,” but the last seemed best of all, for
Wonderland might mean any place where wonderful
things could happen. And this was Lewis Carroll's
idea; anywhere the dream “ Alice” chose to go
would be Wonderland, and none knew better than
he did how eagerly the child-mind paints its own
fairy nooks and corners.
He was not at all excited about his first big ven-
ture; no doubt Alice herself took much more inter-
est. To feel that you are about to be put into print
is certainly a great experience, almost as great as
being photographed; and, knowing how conscien-
tious Lewis Carroll was about little things, we may
be quite sure that her suggestions crept into many
of the pictures, while it is equally certain that the
few additions he made to the original “ Alice” were
carefully considered and firmly insisted upon by this
critical young person.
The first edition of two thousand copies was a
great disappointment; the pictures were badly
printed, and all who had bought them were asked to
send them back with their names and addresses, as
a new edition would be printed immediately and
they would then receive perfect copies. The old
copies Lewis Carroll gave away to various homes
and hospitals, while the new edition, upon which he
feared a great loss, sold so rapidly that he was as-
tonished, and still more so when edition after edition
was demanded by the public, and far from being a

failure, “ Alice in Wonderland ” brought her author
both fame and money.
From that time forward, fortune smiled upon
him; there were no strenuous efforts to increase his
income. "Alice" yielded him an abundance each
year, and he was beset by none of the cares and per-
plexities which are the dragons most writers en-
counter with their literary swords. He welcomed
the fortune, not so much for the good it brought to
him alone, but for the power it gave him to help
others. His countless charities are not recorded be-
cause they were swallowed up in the “ little things”
he did, not in the great benefits which are trumpeted
over the world. His own life, so simple, so full of
purpose, flowed on as usual; he was not one to
change his habits with the turn of Fortune's wheel,
no matter what it brought him.
Of course, everyone knew that a certain Lewis
Carroll had written a clever, charming book of non-
sense, called " Alice in Wonderland ”; that he was
an Oxford man, very much of a scholar, and little
known outside of the University. What people did
not know was that this same Lewis Carroll had for
a double a certain "grave and reverend” young
“ don," named Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, who,
while “ Alice” was making the whole world laugh,
retired to his sanctum and wrote in rapid succession
the following learned pamphlets: “ The Condensa-
tion of Determinants,” “An Elementary Treatise on
Determinants," “ The Fifth Book of Euclid, treated

Algebraically,” “The Algebraic Formulæ for Re-
sponsions."
Now, whatever these may be, they certainly did
not interest children in the least, and Charles Lut-
widge Dodgson did not care in the least, so long as
he could smooth the thorny path of mathematics for
his struggling undergraduates. But Lewis Carroll
was quite a different matter. So long as the chil-
dren were pleased, little he cared for algebra or
geometry.
A funny tale is told about Queen Victoria. It
seems that Lewis Carroll sent the second presenta-
tion copy of “ Alice in Wonderland” to Princess
Beatrice, the Queen's youngest daughter. Her
mother was so pleased with the book that she asked
to have the author's other works sent to her, and we
can imagine her surprise when she received a large
package of learned treatises by the mathematical lec-
turer of Christ Church College.
Who can tell through what curious byways the
thought of the dream-child came dancing across the
flagstones of the great “ Tom Quad.” Yet across
those same flagstones danced the little Liddells
when they thought there was any possibility of a
romp or a story; for Lewis Carroll lived in the
northwest angle, while the girls lived in the beau-
tiful deanery in the northeast angle, and it was only
a "puss-in-the-corner” game to get from one place
to the other.
“ Alice” was written on the ground floor of this

96
northwest angle, and it was in this sunny room that
Lewis Carroll and the real Alice held many a con-
sultation about the new book. ..
All true fame is to a certain extent due to acci-
dent; an act of heroism is generally performed on
the spur of the moment; a great poem is an inspira-
tion; a great invention, though preceded possibly by
years of study, is born of a single moment's inspi-
ration; so “ Alice” came to Lewis Carroll on the
wings of inspiration. His study of girls and their
varying moods has left its impress on a world of
little girls, and there is scarcely a home to-day, in
England or America, where there is not a special
niche reserved for “ Alice in Wonderland,” while
this interesting young lady has been served up in
French, German, Italian, and Dutch, and the famous
poem of Father William has even been translated
into Arabic. Whether the Chinese or the Japanese
have discovered this funny little dream-child we can-
not tell, but perhaps in time she may journey there
and amuse the little maids with the jet-black hair,
the creamy skin, and the slanting eyes. Perhaps
she may even stir them to laughter.
Surely all must agree that the Gryphon himself
bears a strong resemblance to the Chinese dragons,
and it might be, such are the wonders of Wonder-
land, that the Mock Turtle can be found in Japan.
Who knows! At any rate the little English Alice
never thought of the consequences of that “golden
afternoon ”; it was good to be in the boat, to pull

through the rippling .waters and stir a faint breeze
as the oars
“ with little skill-
By little arms are plied”;
then to gather under the friendly shade of the hay-
rick and listen to the wonder tale“ with lots of non-
sense in it."
Dear little Alice of Long Ago! To you we owe a
debt of gratitude. All the little Alices of the past
and all the little Alices of the future will have their
Wonderland because, while floating up and down
the river with the real Alice, Lewis Carroll found
the Golden Key.

CHAPTER VII.
ALICE IN WONDERLAND AND WHAT SHE DID
THERE.
CERTAIN little girl who had been
poring over “Through the Looking-
Glass and What Alice Found There”
with eager interest, when asked which
of the “ Alices” she preferred, answered at once
that she thought “ Through the Looking-Glass”
was " stupider” than “ Alice in Wonderland,” and
when people laughed she was surprised, for she had
enjoyed both books.
Stupid was certainly not the word she meant to
use, nor yet silly, which might have suggested itself
if she had stopped to think. Nonsense is really
what she meant, and only very poor nonsense can
be stupid or silly. Good nonsense is exceedingly
clever; it takes clever people to write it and only
clever people can understand and appreciate it, so
when the real Alice hoped “there would be nonsense
in it” she was only looking for what she was sure
to find: something odd, bright, and funny, with a
laugh tucked away in unexpected places.
98

99
Carroll
as
Nonsense is very ancient and respectable, tracing
its origin back to the days of the Court Fool, whose
office it was to make merry for the king and cour-
tiers. An undersized man was usually selected, one
with some deformity being preferred, whereat the
courtiers might laugh; one with sharp tongue and
ready wit, to make the time fly. He was clothed in
“motley”-that is, his dress, cut in the fashion of
the times, was of many ill-assorted hues, while the
fool's cap with its bells, and the bauble or rattle
which he held in his hand, completed his grotesque
appearance.
To the Fool was allowed the freedom of the court
and a close intimacy with his royal master, to whom
he could say what he pleased without fear of of-
fense; his duty was to amuse, and the sharper his
wit the better. It was called nonsense, though
a sword could not thrust with keener malice, and
historic moments have often hung upon a fool's jest.
The history of the Court Fool is the history of me-
diæval England, France, Spain, and Italy, of a time
when a quick figure of speech might turn the tide of
war, and the Fool could reel off his “nonsense"
when others dared not speak. No one was spared;
the king himself was often the victim of the fool's
tongue, and under the guise of nonsense much wis-
dom lurked.
So it has been ever since; the Court Jester has
passed away with other old court customs, but the
nonsense that was “writ in books” lived after

100
them, so good, so wholesome that we laugh at it
with its old-time swing and sting.
The nonsense that we find in books to-day is of a
higher order than that of the poor little Court Fool
who, swaggering outwardly, trembled inwardly, as
he sent his barbed shaft of wit against some lordly
breast. The wisdom hides in the simple fun of
everyday that makes life a thing of sunshine and
holds the shadows back.
Lewis Carroll had this gift of nonsense more than
any other writer of his time. Dickens and Thack-
eray possessed wit and humor of a high quality, but
they could not command 'so large an audience, for
children turn to healthy nonsense as sunflowers to
the sun, and Lewis Carroll gave them all they
wanted. “ Grown-ups,” too, began to listen, detect-
ing behind the fun much, perhaps, which had
escaped even the author himself, until he put on his
“grown-up” glasses and began to ponder.
Where the real charm lies in “ Alice in Wonder-
land ” would be very difficult to say. If a thousand
children were asked to pick out their favorite parts,
it is probable that not ten of them would think alike.
A great many would say “I like any part,” and
really with such a fascinating book how can one
choose? The very opening is enough to cure any
little girl of drowsiness on a summer day, and the
picture of the pompous little White Rabbit with his
bulging waistcoat and his imposing watch chain, for
all the world like an everyday Englishman, is a type

101
IOI
no doubt that the lively little girls and the grave
young “don” knew pretty well.
Every page gives one something to think about.
To begin with, the fact that Alice is dreaming, is
plain from the beginning, and that very odd sensa-
tion of falling through space often comes during the
first few moments of sleep. A busy dreamer can
accomplish a great deal in a very short time, as we
all know, and the most remarkable things happen in
the simplest way. There is a story, for instance, of
one little girl, who, after a nice warm bath, was
carried to bed and tucked in up to her rosy chin.
Her heavy eyes shut immediately and lo! in half
a minute she was back in the big porcelain tub,
splashing about like a little mermaid; then nurse
pulled the stopper out, and through the waste-pipe
went water, small girl, and all. When she opened
her eyes with a start, she found she had been dream-
ing not quite two minutes. So suppose the real
Alice had been dreaming a half an hour; it was quite
long enough to skip through “ Wonderland,” and to
have delightful and curious things constantly hap-
pening.
. It was the White Rabbit talking to himself that
first attracted her, but a short stay in “Wonderland”.
got her quite used to all sorts of animals and their
funny talk, and the way she had of growing larger
or smaller on the shortest notice was very puzzling
and amusing. How like real people was this
dream-child; how many everyday folks find them-

IO2
both
adult/could
qualities
- selves too small for great places, and too great for
the small ones, and how many experiments they try
to make themselves larger or smaller! You see
Lewis Carroll thought of all this, though he did not
spoil his story by stopping to explain. It is, indeed,
poor nonsense that has to be explained every step of
the way.
The dream “ Alice” just at first was apt to cry
if anything unusual or unpleasant happened; a bad
habit with some children, the real Alice was given
to understand. At any rate, when she drank out of
the bottle that tasted of “cherry tart, custard, pine-
apple, roast turkey, toffy, and hot buttered toast,”
and found herself growing smaller and smaller, she
cried, because she was only ten inches high and
could not possibly reach the Golden Key on the glass
table. Then she took herself to task very sharply,
saying: “ Come, there's no use in crying like that!
I advise you to leave off this minute!”,
“She generally gave herself very good advice
(though she seldom followed it), and sometimes she
scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her
eyes, and once she remembered trying to box her
own ears for having cheated herself in a game of
croquet she was playing against herself, for this
curious child was very fond of pretending to be two
people. “But it's no use now,' thought poor Alice,
'to pretend to be two people, when there's hardly
enough left of me to make one respectable person.'”
Then when she found the little glass box with a
-435
dassa sbbor

cake in it marked “Eat Me" in currants, she de-
cided that if she ate it something different might
happen, for otherwise she would go out like a
candle if she grew any smaller. Of course, as soon
as she swallowed the whole cake, she took a start
and soon stood nine feet high in her slippers.
“Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she
was so surprised that for the moment she quite for-
got to speak good English), ‘now I'm opening out
like the largest telescope that ever was. Good-bye,
feet!' (for when she looked down at her feet they
seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting
so far off.) 'Oh, my poor little feet! I wonder
who will put on your shoes and stockings for you
now, dears? I'm sure I shan't be able! I shall be
a great deal too far off to trouble myself about you;
you must manage the best way you can; but I must
be kind to them, thought Alice, ‘or perhaps they
won't walk the way I want to go! Let me see: I'll
give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.'”
“And she went on planning to herself how she
would manage it. 'They must go by the carrier,'
she thought; 'and how funny it'll seem, sending
presents to one's own feet, and how odd the direc-
tions will look!
Alice's Right Foot, Esq.,
Hearthrug,
near the Fender,
(with Alice's love).
Oh, dear, what nonsense I'm talking.'”

za
104
U
feet
☆ q
high-like
TeleSCOPE -
IN pidi of
Self-produced
liguid
Perhaps it was just here that the children's mer-
riment broke forth; the idea of Alice being nine
feet high was too ridiculous, but the poor dream
"Alice" didn't think so, for she sat down and be-
gan to cry again.
“'You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said
Alice, “a great girl like you' (she might well say
this) 'to go on crying in this way! Stop this mo-
ment I tell you!' But she went on all the same,
shedding gallons of tears until there was a large
pool all around her about four inches deep and
reaching half down the hall.”
This change she found more puzzling still:
everything seemed mixed up, the Multiplication
Table, Geography, even the verses which had been
familiar to her from babyhood. She tried to say
“How doth the little busy bee," but the words
would not come right; instead she began repeating,
in a hoarse, strange voice, the following noble
lines:
“How doth the little crocodile
Improve his shining tail,
And pour the waters of the Nile
On every golden scale !
“How cheerfully he seems to grin,
How neatly spreads his claws,
And welcomes little fishes in,
With gently smiling jaws ! ”
Naturally this produced a sensation, for where
is the child who speaks English who does not

105
know that the busy bee“ improves the shining
hours!”
When the book was translated into French, how-
ever, this odd little rhyme not being known to the
French children, the translator, M. Henri Bué, had
to substitute something else which they could un-
derstand-one of their own French rhymes made
into a parody of La Fontaine's “ Maitre Corbeau ”
(Master Raven).
When Alice began to shrink again, she went sud-
denly splash into that immense pool of tears she
had shed when she was nine feet high. Now she
was only two feet high and the water was up to
her chin. It was so salty, being tear-water, that
she thought she had fallen into the sea, and in this
sly fashion Lewis Carroll managed to smuggle in
a timely word about the sad way some little girls and care a
have of shedding “oceans of tears” on the most
trifling occasion.
It was on this briny trip that she fell in with the
numbers of queer animals who had also taken ref-
uge in the “ Pool of Tears," from the Mouse to
the Lory, who had all fallen into the water and
were eagerly swimming toward the shore. They
gained it at last and sat there, “ the birds with drag-
gled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging
close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable,” including Alice herself, whose
long hair hung wet and straggling on her shoul-
ders.
including
Alice Wet, cross, and
long hair hun.

Іоб
bros
sis.
refusal
350
7 horunum
Not
Ny
"S***
distort
owy
r The Lory, of all the odd animals, was probably
the oddest. Alice found herself talking familiarly
with them all, and entering into quite a lengthy ar-
gument with the Lory in particular about how to
get dry. But the Lory “turned sulky and would
only say: 'I am older than you and must know
better,' and this ‘Alice' would not allow without
knowing how old it was, and as the 'Lory' posi-
tively refused to tell its age, there was nothing
more to be said.”
Lewis Carroll himself made some interesting
notes on the life history of this remarkable animal,
which were first produced in The Rectory Umbrella
long before he thought of popping it into “Won-
derland.” “ This creature,” he writes, “is, we be-
lieve, a species of parrot. Southey informs us that
it is a bird of gorgeous plumery [plumage], and it
is our private opinion that there never existed more
than one, whose history, as far as practicable, we
will now lay before our readers."
“ The time and place of the Lory's birth is un-
certain; the egg from which it was hatched was
most probably, to judge from the color of the bird,
one of those magnificent Easter eggs which our
readers have doubtless seen. The experiment of
hatching an Easter egg is at any rate worth try-
ing."
After a lengthy and confusing description he
winds up as follows:
“Having thus stated all we know and a great

107
deal we don't know on this interesting subject, we
must conclude.”
Alice looked upon this domineering old bird of
uncertain age quite as a matter of course, as, in-
deed, she looked upon everything that happened in
Wonderland.
There is fun bubbling over in every situation.
Sir John Tenniel has given us a clever picture of
the wet, woe-begone animals, all clustering around
the Mouse, who had undertaken to make them dry.
“ Ahem!” said the Mouse, with an important air,
“are you all ready? This is the driest thing I
know," and off he rambled into some dull corner
of English history, most probably taken out of
Alice's own lesson book, not unknown to Lewis -
Carroll.
The Caucas race was suggested by the Dodo as
an excellent method for getting dry, and as it was
a race in which everyone came in ahead, everyone
of course was satisfied, and in the distribution of
prizes no one was forgotten. Alice herself re-
ceived her own thimble, which she fished out of her
pocket, and which the Dodo solemnly handed back
to her, “ saying: 'We beg your acceptance of this
elegant thimble,' and when it had finished this short
speech they all cheered.”
Dinah, the real Alice's real cat, plays an impor-
tant part in the drama of Wonderland, although she
was left at home dozing in the sun; Alice mortally
offended the Mouse, and frightened many of her

108
Jun
bird friends almost to death, simply by bringing
her into the conversation.
It is certainly delightful to follow in the foot-
steps of this dream-child of Lewis Carroll's; we
lose ourselves in the mazes of Wonderland, and
even as we grow older we do not feel that we have
to stoop in the least to pass through the portals.
There was a certain air of sociability in Wonder-
land that pleased Alice immensely, for her visiting-
list was quite astonishing, and she was continually
meeting new—well, not exactly people, but experi-
ences. Her talk with a caterpillar during one of
those periods when she was barely tall enough to
peep over the mushroom on which he was sitting
is “highly amusing and instructive."
“Who are you?' said the Caterpillar.
“ This was not an encouraging opening for a
conversation. Alice replied rather shyly: 'I-I
hardly know, sir, just at present: at least I know
who I was when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have changed several times since then.'
“'What do you mean by that?' said the Cater-
pillar sternly. 'Explain yourself!'
"'I can't explain myself, I'm afraid, sir,' said
Alice, “because I'm not myself, you see.'
“'I don't see,' said the Caterpillar.
“ I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly,' Alice
replied, very politely, ‘for I can't understand it
myself to begin with, and being so many different
sizes in a day is very confusing.'

109
“. It isn't,' said the Caterpillar.
“Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,'
said Alice, but when you have to turn into a
chrysalis—you will some day, you know—and
then after that into a butterfly, I should think you'll
feel it a little queer, won't you?'
“Not a bit,' said the Caterpillar.
“Well, perhaps your feelings may be differ-
ent,' said Alice; 'all I know is, it would feel very
queer to me.
“'You!' said the Caterpillar, contemptuously,
'Who are you?' Which brought them back again
to the beginning of the conversation.".
It was the Caterpillar who asked her to recite
“ You are old, Father William," and Alice began
in this fashion :
“You are old, Father William," the young man said,
“And your hair has become very white;
And yet you incessantly stand on your head-
Do you think at your age it is right?”
“In my youth,” Father William replied to his son,
“I feared it might injure the brain;
But now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
Why, I do it again and again.”
“ You are old,” said the youth, “as I mentioned before,
And have grown most uncommonly fat;
Yet you turned a back somersault in at the door-
Pray, what is the reason of that?"

ΙΙΟ
“In my youth,” said the sage, as he shook his gray locks,
“I kept all my limbs very supple
By the use of this ointment-one shilling the box-
Allow me to sell you a couple.”
oral - Sadista
aggressiveNESSA
“You are old,” said the youth, “and your jaws are too
weak
For anything tougher than suet ;
Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak-
Pray, how did you manage to do it?”
cannabalishe
fendings/
“In my youth,” said his father, “I took to the law,
And argued each case with my wife;
And the muscular strength which it gave to my jaw
Has lasted the rest of my life.”
“ You are old," said the youth; “one would hardly sup-
pose
That your eye was as steady as ever;
Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose-
What made you so awfully clever?”
“I have answered three questions, and that is enough,"
Said his father; “don't give yourself airs !
Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
Be off, or I'll kick you downstairs !”
Now Alice knew well enough that she had given
an awful twist to a pretty and old-fashioned piece
of poetry, but for the life of her the old words re-
fused to come. It seemed that with her power to
grow large or small on short notice, her memory
performed queer antics; she was never sure of it
for two minutes together.
One odd thing about her change of size was that

III
A: си
kade -
she never grew up or dwindled away unless she ate
something or drank something. Now every little
girl has had similar experience when it came to
eating and drinking. “Eat so and so,” says a
“grown-up,” “and you will be tall and strong," and
“if you don't eat this thing or that, you will be
little all your life,” so Alice was only going
through the same trials in Wonderland.
Her meeting with the Duchess and the peppery
Cook, and the screaming Baby, and the grinning
Cheshire Cat, occupied some thrilling moments.
She found the Duchess conversational but cross,
and the Cook sprinkling pepper lavishly into the
soup she was stirring, and out of it for the matter
of that, so that everybody was sneezing. The Cat
was the sole exception; it sat on the hearth and
grinned from ear to ear. Alice opened the conver-
sation by asking the Duchess, who was holding the
Baby and jumping it up and down so roughly that
it howled dismally, why the Cat grinned in that
absurd way.
“It's a Cheshire Cat,' said the Duchess, and
that's why. 'Pig!' She said the last word with
such sudden violence that Alice quite jumped; but
she saw in another moment that it was addressed
to the Baby and not to her, so she took courage and
went on again:
““I didn't know that Cheshire Cats always
grinned-in fact I didn't know that Cats could
male
beton -
pia=
poem
(bauung
kid)
grin,'

II2
“ They all can,' said the Duchess, and most of
'em do.'
“I don't know of any that do,' said Alice, very
politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a
conversation.
“You don't know much,' said the Duchess;
' and that's a fact.'
“ Alice did not like the tone of this remark and
thought it would be well to introduce some other
subject of conversation.”
Then the Cook began throwing things about,
and the Duchess, to quiet the howling Baby, sang
the following beautiful lullaby, which she empha-
sized by a violent shake at the end of every line.
Considering Lewis Carroll's rather strong feeling
on the boy question, they were most appropriate
lines, indeed.
Speak roughly to your little boy,
And beat him when he sneezes;
He only does it to annoy,
Because he know it teases.
Chorus.
(In which the Cook and the Baby joined.)
Wow! wow! wow!
I speak severely to my boy,
I beat him when he sneezes,
For he can thoroughly enjoy
The pepper when he pleases !
Chorus.
Wow! wow! wow!

113
Imagine the quiet “don " beating time to this
beautiful measure, his blue eyes gleaming with fun,
his expressive voice shaded to just the right tones
to give color to the chorus, while the little girls
chimed in at the proper moment. It was no trou-
ble for him to make rhymes, being endowed with
this wonderful gift of nonsense, and in conversa-
tion he was equally clever. He gave the Duchess
quite the air of a learned lady, even though she
did not know that mustard was a vegetable. When
Alice suggested that it was a mineral, she was quite
ready to agree. “ There's a large mustard mine
near here,' she observed, “and the moral of that
is' [the Duchess had a moral for everything],
“ The more there is of mine the less there is
of yours.” “Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice,
who had not attended to this last remark,
'it's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one but
it is.'
“'I quite agree with you,' said the Duchess,
and the moral of that is, “Be what you would
seem to be," or if you'd like to put it more simply,
“Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might appear to others that what you were
or might have been was not otherwise than what
you had been would have appeared to them to be
otherwise."!
"I think I should understand that better,' said
Alice, very politely, 'if I had it written down, but
I can't quite follow it as you say it.'

114
“• That's nothing to what I could say if
I chose,'” the Duchess replied in a pleasant
tone.
Alice's talk with the Cheshire Cat, which had the
remarkable power of appearing and vanishing in
portions, the table gossip at the Mad Tea Party, to
which she was an uninvited guest, are too well-
known to quote. Many a time the Mad Tea Party
has been the theme of some nursery play or school
entertainment. The Mad Hatter and the March
Hare were certainly the maddest things that ever
were. When the Hatter complained of his watch
being two days wrong, he turned angrily to the
March Hare, saying:
“'I told you butter wouldn't suit the works.'
“It was the best butter,' the March Hare
meekly replied.
“Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as
well,' the Hatter grumbled; you shouldn't have
put it in with the bread knife.
“The March Hare took the watch and looked at it
gloomily; then he dipped it into his cup of tea and
looked at it again; but he could think of nothing
better to say than his first remark, 'It was the best
butter you know.'”
Surely nothing could be more amusing that this
party of mad ones, and the sleepy Dormouse, who
sat between the March Hare and the Hatter, con-
tributed his share to the fun, while the Hatter's
songs, which he sang at the concert given by the

115
Queen of Hearts, was certainly very familiar to
Alice. It began:
Twinkle, twinkle, little bat-
How I wonder what you're at !
Up above the world you fly,
Like a tea tray in the sky.
Twinkle, twinkle.
Who but Lewis Carroll could invent such a
scene? Who could better plan the little sparkling
sentences which gave the nonsense just the glitter
which children found so fascinating and so laugh-
able. Yet what did they laugh at after all?
What do we laugh at even to-day in glancing over
the familiar pages ? What is it in the mysterious
depths of childhood which Lewis Carroll has
caught in his golden web? Perhaps, it is not all
mere childhood; we are ourselves but “children of
a larger growth," and deep down within us at some
time or other fancy runs riot and imagination does
the rest. So it was with Lewis Carroll, only his
fancy soared into genius, carrying with it, as some-
one has said, “a suggestion of clear and yet soft
laughing sunshine. He never made us laugh at
anything, but always with him and his knights and
queens and heroes of the nursery rhymes.”
Behind much of the world's laughter tears may
be hiding, but not so in the case of Lewis Carroll;
all is pure mirth that flows from him to us, and
above all he possesses that indescribable thing

Ir6
called charm. It lurks in the quaint conversations,
in the fluent measure of the songs, in the fantastic
scenes so full of ideas that seem to vanish before
we quite grasp them—like the Cheshire Cat—leav-
ing only the smile behind.
To those of us—the world in short—who were
denied the privilege of hearing Lewis Carroll tell
his own story, the Tenniel pictures bring Won-
derland very close. Our natural history alone
would not help us in the least when it came to clas-
sifying the many strange animals Alice met on her
journey. The Mock Turtle, the Gryphon, the
Lory, the Dodo, the Cheshire Cat, the Fish and
Frog footmen-how could we imagine them with-
out the Tenniel " guidebook”? The numberless
transformations of Alice could hardly be under-
stood without photographs of her in the various
stages. And certainly at the croquet party, given
by the Queen of Hearts, how could anyone imagine
a game played with bent-over soldiers for wickets,
hedgehogs for croquet balls, and flamingoes for
mallets, unless there were accompanying illustra-
tions?
One specially interesting picture shows the
Gryphon in the foreground; he and Alice paid a
visit to the Mock Turtle, who, by way of entertain-
ing his guests, gave the following description of
the Lobster Quadrille. With tears running down
his cheeks he began:
“• You have never lived much under the sea'

117
('I haven't,' said Alice) ‘and perhaps you were
never introduced to a lobster—' (Alice began to
say 'I once tasted—' but she checked herself
hastily, and said, “No, never'), 'so you can have
no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille
is !'
“No, indeed,' said Alice. "What sort of a
dance is it?'
"Why,' said the Gryphon, you first form into
a line along the seashore.'
""Two lines!' cried the Mock Turtle. “Seals,
turtles, salmon, and so on; then when you've
cleared all the jellyfish out of the way—'
“'That generally takes some time,' interrupted
the Gryphon.
“ “You advance twice.'
“• Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the
Gryphon.
“Of course,' the Mock Turtle said; 'advance
twice, set to partners—’
"Change lobsters and retire in same order,'
continued the Gryphon.
““Then, you know,' the Mock Turtle went on,
'you throw the
"The lobsters!' shouted the Gryphon with a
bound into the air.
"• As far out to sea as you can-
“Swim after them!' screamed the Gryphon.
“'Turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the Mock
Turtle, capering wildly about.

118
“'Change lobsters again!' yelled the Gryphon
at the top of its voice.
“'Back to land again, and that's all the first
figure,' said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping
his voice, and the two creatures who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time sat
down again, very sadly and quietly, and looked at
Alice.”
Who could read this without laughing, with no
reason for the laugh but sheer delight and sympa-
thy with the story-teller, and with dancing and mo-
tion and all the rest of it. If anyone begins to
hunt for the reasons why we like “ Alice in Won-
derland” that person is either very, very sleepy,
or she has left her youth so far behind her that,
like the Lory, she absolutely refuses to tell her age,
in which case she must be as old as the hills.
Then the dance, which the two gravely per-
formed for the little girl, and who can forget the
song of the Mock Turtle?
“Will you walk a little faster !” said a whiting to a
snail,
“There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading
on my tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all
advance!
They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and
join the dance ?
Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join
the dance?
Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join
the dance?

119
“ You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters,
out to sea!”
But the snail replied, “ Too far, too far!” and gave a
look askance-
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not
join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not
join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not
join the dance."
“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend re-
plied,
“There is another shore, you know, upon the other side,
The farther off from England the nearer is to France;
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join
the dance.
Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you
join the dance ?
Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you
join the dance?"
Then Alice tried to repeat “ 'Tis the voice of the
Sluggard,” but she was so full of the Lobster Qua-
drille that the words came like this:
'Tis the voice of the lobster, I heard him declare,
“ You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.”
As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
· Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.
The whole time she was in Wonderland she
never by any chance recited anything correctly,

I 20
and through all of her wanderings she never met
anything in the shape of a little boy, except the
infant son of the Duchess, who after all turned out
to be a pig and vanished in the woods. The
“ roundabouts" played no parts in “ Alice in Won-
derland,” and yet—to a man—they love it to this
day.
When at last Alice bade farewell to the Mock
Turtle, she left it sobbing of course, and singing
with much emotion the following song, entitled :
TURTLE SOUP.
Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
Waiting in a hot tureen!
Who for such dainties would not stoop?
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Beau-ootiful Soo-oop!
Beau—ootiful Soo-oop!
Soo-oop of the eme-evening,
Beautiful, beautiful Soup!
Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
Game, or any other dish
Who would not give all else for two p
ennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
Beau—ootiful Soo-oop!
Beau-ootiful Soo-oop!
Soo-oop of the e-e-evening,
Beautiful, beauti-FUL SOUP!
We might spend a whole chapter over the great
trial scene of the Knave of Hearts. We all know

121
I2I
that the wretched fellow stole some tarts upon a
summer's day, and that he was brought in chains
before the King and Queen, to face the charges.
What we did not know was that it was the fourth
of July, and that Alice was one of the witnesses.
This, in a certain way, is the cleverest chapter
in the book, for all the characters in Wonderland
take part in the proceedings, which are so like, and
yet so comically unlike, a real court. We forget,
as Alice did, that all these royalties are but a pack
of cards, and follow all the evidence with the great-
est interest, including the piece of paper which the
White Rabbit had just found and presented to the
Court. It contained the following verses :
They told me you had been to her,
And mentioned me to him:
She gave me a good character,
But said I could not swim.
He sent them word I had not gone
(We know it to be true):
If she should push the matter on,
What would become of you?
I gave her one, they gave him two,
You gave us three or more:
They all returned from him to you,
Though they were mine before.
If I or she should chance to be
Involved in this affair,
He trusts to you to set them free,
Exactly as we were.

I 22
My notion was that you had been
(Before she had this fit)
An obstacle that came between
Him, and ourselves, and it.
Don't let him know she liked them best,
For this must ever be
A secret, kept from all the rest,
Between yourself and me.
This truly clear explanation touches the Queen
of Hearts so closely that the outsider is led to be-
lieve that she is indirectly responsible for the theft,
that the poor knave is but the tool of her Majesty,
whose fondness for tarts led her into temptation.
Lewis Carroll had a keen eye for the dramatic
climax—the packed court room, the rambling evi-
dence, the mystifying scrap of paper, and Alice's
defiance of the King and Queen.
"Off with her head!' the Queen shouted at
the top of her voice. Nobody moved. Who
cares for you?' said Alice (she had grown to her
full size by this time), ‘you're nothing but a pack
of cards.'
“At this, the whole pack rose up in the air and
came flying down upon her; she gave a little
scream, half of fright, half of anger, and tried to
beat them off and found herself lying on the bank,
with her head in the lap of her sister, who was
gently brushing away some dead leaves that had
futtered down from the trees on to her face ..."

123
And so Alice woke up, shook back the elf-locks,
and laughed as she rubbed her eyes.
“Such a curious dream!” she said, as the won-
der of it all came back to her, and she told her sis-
ter of the queer things she had seen and heard, and
long after she had run away, this big sister sat with
closed eyes, dreaming and wondering.
“ The long grass rustled at her feet as the White
Rabbit hurried by; the frightened Mouse splashed
his way through the neighboring pool; she could
hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare
and his friends shared their never-ending meal, and
the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her un-
fortunate guests to execution. Once more the pig-
baby was sneezing on the Duchess's knee, while
plates and dishes crashed around it; once more the
shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Liz-
ard's slate pencil, and the choking of the suppressed
Guinea Pigs filled the air, mixed up with the dis-
tant sob of the miserable Mock Turtle."
Yet when she opened her eyes she knew that
Wonderland must go. In reality“ the grass would
only be rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling
to the waving of the reeds, the rattling teacups
would change to tinkling sheep bells and the
Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd
boy, and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the
Gryphon, and all the other queer noises would
change ... to the confused clamor of the busy
farmyard, while the lowing of the cattle in the dis-

124
tance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.”
So we have dreamed of Wonderland from that
time till now, when Lewis Carroll looks out from
the pages of his book and says:
“That's all-for to-night-there may be more
to-morrow.”

CHAPTER VIII.
HE popularity of “ Alice in Wonder-
land” was a never-ending source of sur-
prise to the author, who had only to
2 stand quietly by and rake in his profits,
as edition after edition was swallowed up by a pub-
lic incessantly clamoring for more, and Lewis Car-
roll was not too modest to enjoy the sensation he
was creating in the literary world. His success
came to him unsought, and was all the more lasting
because the seeds of it were planted in love and
laughter. Let us see what he says in the preface to
“ Alice Underground,” the forerunner, as we know,
of “ Alice in Wonderland.”
“ The'why' of this book cannot and need not be
put into words. Those for whom a child's mind is
a sealed book, and who see no divinity in a child's
smile, would read such words in vain; while for any
one who has ever loved one true child, no words are
needed. For he will have known the awe that falls
on one in the presence of a spirit, fresh from God's
hands, on whom no shadow of sin, and but the
125

126
outermost fringe of the shadow of sorrow, has yet
fallen; he will have felt the bitter contrast between
the haunting selfishness that spoils his best deeds
and the life that is but an overflowing love-for I
think a child's first attitude to the world is a simple
love for all living things—and he will have learned
that the best work a man can do is when he works
for love's sake only, with no thought of name or
gain or earthly reward. No deed of ours, I sup-
pose, on this side of the grave is really unselfish, yet
if one can put forth all one's powers in a task where
nothing of reward is hoped for but a little child's
whispered thanks, and the airy touch of a little
child's pure lips, one seems to have come some-
where near to this.”
In the appendix to the same book he writes re-
garding laughter:
"I do not believe God means us to divide life into
two halves—to wear a grave face on Sunday, and
to think it out of place even so much as to men-
tion Him on a week-day. . . . Surely the children's
innocent laughter is as sweet in His ears as the
grandest anthem that ever rolled up from the dim
religious light' of some solemn cathedral; and if I
have written anything to add to those stores of in-
nocent and healthy amusement that are laid up in
books for the children I love so .well, it is surely
something I may hope to look back upon without
shame or sorrow ... when my turn comes to walk
through the valley of shadows."

Such was the man who filled the world with
laughter, and wrote “nonsense” books; a man of
such deeply religious feeling that a jest that touched
upon sacred things, however innocent in itself, was
sure to bring down his wrath upon the head of the
offender. There is a certain strain of sadness in
those quoted words of his, which surely never be-
longed to those "golden summer days” when he
made merry with the three little Liddells. We must
remember that twenty-one years had passed between
the telling of the story and the reprint of the original
manuscript, and Lewis Carroll was just a little
graver and considerably older than on that eventful
day when the White Rabbit looked at his watch as
if to say: “ Oh~my ears and whiskers! What will
the Duchess think!” as he popped down the hole
with Alice at his heels.
But we are going a little too far ahead. After
the writing of “ Alice,” with the accompanying ex-
citement of seeing his first-born win favor, Lewis
Carroll went quietly forward in his daily routine.
He had already become quite a famous lecturer,
being, indeed, the only mathematical lecturer in
Christ Church College, so Charles Lutwidge Dodg-
son was not completely overshadowed by the glory
of Lewis Carroll.
From the beginning he was careful to separate
these two sides of his life, and the numbers of let-
ters which soon began to pour in upon the latter
were never recognized by the grave, precise “don,”

128
whose thoughts flowed in numbers, and so it was all
through his life. When anyone wrote to him, ad-
dressing him by his real name, and praising him for
the “ Alice” books, he sent a printed reply which
he kept“ handy,” saying that as C. L. Dodgson was
so often approached as the author of books bearing
another name, it must be understood that Mr. Dodg-
son never acknowledged the authorship of a book
which did not bear his name. He was most careful in
the wording of this printed form, that it should bear
no shadow of untruth. It was only his shy way of
avoiding the notice of strangers, and it succeeded so
well that very few people knew that the Rev. Charles
Dodgson and Lewis Carroll were one and the same
person. It was also hinted, and very broadly, too,
that many of the queer characters Alice met on her
journey through Wonderland were very dignified
and stately figures in the University itself, who
posed unconsciously as models. The Hatter is an
acknowledged portrait, and no doubt there were
many other sly caricatures, for Lewis Carroll was a
born humorist.
“ Alice” has been given to the public in many
ways besides translations. There have been lectures,
plays, magic lantern slides of Tenniel's wonderful
pictures, tableaux; and many scenes find their way,
even at this day, in the nursery wall-paper covered
over with Gryphons and Mock Turtles and the
whole Court of Cards a most imposing array. It
has been truly stated that, with the exception of

Shakespeare's plays, no books have been so often
quoted as the two “ Alices."
After the publication of “ Alice in Wonderland,”
Lewis Carroll contributed short stories to the vari-
ous periodicals which were eager for his work. As.
early as 1867, he sent to Aunt Judy's Magazine a
short story called “ Bruno's Revenge,” the founda-
tion of “Sylvie and Bruno," which was never pub-
lished in book form until 1889, twenty-two years
after.
The editor of the magazine, Mrs. Gatty, in ac-
cepting the story, gave the author some wliolesome
advice wrapped up in a bundle of praise for the
dainty little idyll. She reminded him that mathe-
matical ability such as he possessed was also the gift
of hundreds of others, but his story-telling talent,
so full of exquisite touches, was peculiarly his own,
and whatever of fame might come to him would be
on the wings of the fairies, and not from the lecture
room.
In “ Bruno's Revenge” we have, for the first time
in any of his stories, a little boy. It was a sort of
unwilling tribute Lewis Carroll paid to the poor
despised “roundabouts," and for all the winsome
fairy ways and merry little touches, Bruno was
never quite the real thing; at any rate the story was
put away to simmer, and as the long years passed,
it was added to bit by bit until—but that is another
story.
Between the publication of " Alice" and the sum-

130
mer vacation of 1867 he wrote several very learned
mathematical works that earned him much distinc-
tion among the Christ Church undergraduates, who
found it hard to believe that Mr. Dodgson and
Lewis Carroll were so closely connected. It was
during this summer (1867) that he and Dr. Liddon
took a short tour on the Continent.
The two men had much in common and were firm
friends. Both had the true Oxford spirit, both
were churchmen, Dr. Liddon being quite a famous
preacher, and both were men of high intelligence
with a good supply of humor; consequently the
prospect of a trip to Russia together was a very de-
lightful one. Lewis Carroll kept a journal which
was such a complete record of his experiences that
at one time he thought of publishing it, though it
was never done.
He went up to London on July 12th, remarking
in his characteristic way that he and the Sultan of
Turkey arrived on the same day, his entrance being
at Paddington station—the Sultan's at Charing
Cross, where, he was forced to admit, the crowd
was much greater. He met Dr. Liddon at Dover
and they crossed to Calais, finding the passage un-
usually smooth and uneventful, feeling in some way
that they had paid their money in vain, for the trip
across the channel is generally one of storm and
stress.
All such tours have practically the same object-
to see and to enjoy—and the young “ don” came

out of his den for this express purpose. It had been
impossible in the busy years since his graduation to
take his holidays far away from home, but at the
age of thirty-five he felt that he had earned the
right, and proceeded to use it in his own way.
Their route lay through Germany, stopping at
Cologne, Danzig, Berlin and Königsberg, among
other places, and he feasted on the beauties which
these various cities had to offer him; the architec-
ture and paintings, the pageantry of strange reli-
gions, the music in the great cathedrals, and last, but
not least, the foreign drama interested him greatly.
The German acting was easy enough to follow, as
he knew a little of the language; but the Russian
tongue was beyond him, and he could only rely upon
the gestures and expression.
Their special object in going to Russia was to see
the great fair at Nijni-Novgorod. This fair brought
all the corners of the earth together; Chinese, Per-
sians, Tartars, native Russians, mingled in the busy,
surging life about them, and lent color and variety
to every step. The two friends spent their time
pleasantly, for the fame of Dr. Liddon's preaching
had reached Russia, and the clergy opened their
doors to the travelers and took them over many
churches and monasteries, which otherwise they
might never have seen. They stopped in Moscow,
St. Petersburg, Kronstadt, Warsaw, taking in Leip-
zig, Giessen, Ems, and many smaller places on the
homeward road.

132
They visited a famous monastery while in Mos-
cow, and were even shown the subterranean cells of
the hermits. At Kronstadt they had a most amusing
experience. They went to call upon a friend, and Dr.
Liddon, forgetting his scanty knowledge of the Rus-
sian language, rashly handed his overcoat to one of
the servants. When they were ready to leave there
was a waiting-maid in attendance—but no overcoat.
The damsel spoke no English, the gentleman spoke
no Russian, so Dr. Liddon asked for his overcoat
with what he considered the most appropriate ges-
ture. Intelligence beamed upon the maiden's face;
she ran from the room, returning with a clothes
brush. No, Dr. Liddon did not want his coat
brushed; he tried other gestures, succeeding so beau-
tifully that the girl was convinced that he wanted to
take a nap on the sofa, and brought a cushion and
a pillow for that purpose. Still no overcoat, and
Dr. Liddon was in despair until Lewis Carroll made
a sketch of his friend with one coat on, in the act of
putting on another, in the hands of an obliging Rus-
sian peasant. The drawing was so expressive that
the maid understood at once; the mystery was
solved—and the coat recovered.
With this gift of drawing a situation, it is re-
markable that Lewis Carroll never became an artist.
With all his artistic ideas, and with his real knowl-
edge of art, it seems a pity that he could not have
gratified his ambition, but after serious consultation
with John Ruskin, who as critic and friend ex-

amined his work, he decided that his natural gift
was not great enough to push, and sensibly resolved
not to waste so much precious time. Still, to the
end of his life, he drew for amusement's sake and
for the pleasure it gave his small friends.
Altogether their tour was a very pleasant one,
and their return was through Germany, that most
interesting country of hills and valleys and pretty
white villages nestling among the trees. What
Lewis Carroll specially liked was the way the old
castles seemed to spring out of the rock on which
they had been built, as if they had grown there with-
out the aid of bricks and mortar. He admired the
spirit of the old architects, which guided them to
plan buildings naturally suited to their surround-
ings, and was never tired of the beautiful hills, so
densely covered with small trees as to look moss-
grown in the distance.
On his return to Oxford, he plunged at once into
very active work. The new term was beginning-
there were lectures to prepare and courses to plan,
and undergraduates to interview, all of which kept
him quite busy for a while, though it did not inter-
fere with certain cozy afternoon teas, when he re-
lated his summer adventures to his numerous girl
friends, and kept them in a gale of laughter over his
many queer experiences.
But these same little girls were clamoring for
another book, and a hundred thousand others were
alike eager for it, to judge by the heavy budgets of

134
mail he received, so he cast about in that original
mind of his for a worthy sequel to “ Alice in
Wonderland.” He was willing to write a sequel
then, for “ Alice” was still fresh and amusing to a
host of children, and its luster had been undimmed
as yet by countless imitations. To be sure “ Alice
in Blunderland” had appeared in Punch, the well-
known English paper of wit and humor, but then
Punch was Punch, and spared nothing which might
yield a ripple of laughter.
When it was known that he had finally deter-
mined to write the book, a leading magazine offered
him two guineas a page (a sum equal to about ten
dollars in our money) for the privilege of printing
it as a serial. This story as we know was called
“Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice
Found There," though few people take time to use
the full title. It is usually read by youngsters right
“ on top” of “ Alice in Wonderland.” They speak
of the two books as the “ Alices," and some of the
best editions are even bound together, so closely are
the stories connected.
With Lewis Carroll's aptness for doing things
backward, is it any wonder that he pushed Alice
through the Looking-Glass? And so full of grace
and beauty and absurd situations is the story he has
given us, we quite forget that it was written for the
public, and not entirely for three little girls “all on
a summer's day." No doubt they heard the chap-
ters for they were right there across “ Tom Quad”

and could be summoned by a whistle, if need be,
along with some other little girls who had sprung
up within the walls of Christ Church.
At any rate the story turned out far beyond his
expectations and he was again fortunate in securing
Tenniel as his illustrator. It was no easy task to
illustrate for Lewis Carroll, who criticised every
stroke, and being quite enough of an artist to know
exactly what he wanted, he was never satisfied
until he had it. This often tried the patience
of those who worked with him, but his own good
humor and unfailing courtesy generally won in the
end.
In the midst of this pleasant work came the great-
est sorrow of his life, the death of his father, Arch-
deacon Dodgson, on June 21, 1868. Seventeen
years had passed since his mother's death, which had
left him stunned on the very threshold of his college
life; but he was only a boy in spite of his unusual
gravity, and his youth somehow fought for him
when he battled with his grief. In those interven-
ing years, he and his father had grown very close
together. One never took a step without consult-
ing the other. Christ Church and all it meant to
one of them was alike dear to the other. The arch-
deacon took the keenest interest in his son's outside
work, and we may be quite sure that “ Alice” was
as much read and as thoroughly enjoyed by this
grave scholar as by any other member of his house-
hold. It was the suddenness of his death which left
10

136
its lasting mark on Lewis Carroll, and the fact that
he was summoned too late to see his father alive.
It was a terrible shock, and a grief of which he
could never speak. He wrote some beautiful letters
about it, but those who knew him well respected the
wall of silence he erected.
In truth, our quiet, self-contained “don” was a
man of deep emotions; the quiet, the poise, had come
through years of inward struggle, and he main-
tained it at the cost of being considered a little cold
by people who never could know the trouble it had
been to smother the fire. He put away his sorrow
with other sacred things, and on his return to
Oxford went to work in his characteristic way on
a pamphlet concerning the Fifth Book of Euclid,
written principally to aid the students during exam-
inations, and which was considered an excellent bit
of work.
In November, 1868, he moved into new quarters
in Christ Church and, as he occupied these rooms
for the rest of his life, a little description of them
just here would not be out of place.
“Tom Quad,” we must not forget, was the Great
Quadrangle of Christ Church, where all the masters
and heads of the college lived with their families.
This was called being in residence, and a pretty
sight it was to see the great stretch of green, and its
well-kept paths gay with the life that poured from
the doors and peeped through the windows of this
wonderful place; a sunny day brought out all the

young ones, and just here Lewis Carroll's closest
ties were formed.
The angles of “Tom Quad” were the choice
spots for a lodging, and Lewis Carroll lived in the
west angle, first on the ground floor, where, as we
know, “ Alice in Wonderland ” was written; then,
when he made his final move, it was to the floor
above, which was brighter and sunnier, giving him
more rooms and more space. This upper floor
looked out upon the flat roof of the college, an excel-
lent place for photography, to which he was still de-
voted, and he asked permission of those in charge
to erect a studio there. This was easily obtained,
and could the walls tell tales they would hum with
the voices of the celebrated “fies” this clever
young “spider” lured into his den. For he took
beautiful photographs at a time when photography
was not the perfect system that it is now, and
nothing pleased him better than posing well-known
people. All the big lights of Oxford sat before his
camera, including Lord Salisbury, who was Chan-
cellor at that time. Artists, sculptors, writers,
actors of note had their pleasant hour in Lewis Car-
roll's studio.
Our “don” was very partial to great people, that
is, the truly great, the men and women who truly
counted in the world, whether by birth and breeding
or by some accomplished deed or high aim. Being
a cultured gentleman himself, he had a vast respect
for culture in other people—not a bad trait when all

138
is told, and setting very naturally upon an English-
man born of gentle stock, with generations of ladies
and gentlemen at his back. One glance into the sen-
sitive, refined face of Charles Dodgson would con-
vince us at once that no friendship he ever formed
had anything but the highest aim for him. He
might have chosen for his motto-
"Only what thou art in thyself, not what thou hast,
determines thy value.”
Even among his girl friends, the "little lady," no
matter how poor or plain, was his first object; that
was a strong enough foundation. The rest was
easy.
But here we have been outside in the studio soar-
ing a bit in the sky, when our real destination is that
suite of beautiful big rooms where Lewis Carroll
lived and wrote and entertained his many friends,
for hospitality was one of his greatest pleasures,
and his dining-room and dinner parties are well re-
membered by every child friend he knew, to say
nothing of those privileged elders who were some-
times allowed to join them. He was very particular
about his dinners and luncheons, taking care to have
upon the table only what his young guests could eat.
He had four sitting rooms and quite as many bed-
rooms, to say nothing of store-rooms, closets and
so forth. His study was a great room, full of com-
fortable sofas and chairs, and stools and tables, and
cubby-holes and cupboards, where many wonder-

fully interesting things were hidden from view, to
be brought forth at just the right moment for
special entertainment.
Lewis Carroll had English ideas about comfort-
able surroundings. He loved books, and his shelves
were well filled with volumes of his own choosing;
a rare and valuable library, where each book was a
tried friend.
A man with so many sitting rooms must certainly
have had use for them all, and knowing how
methodical he was we may feel quite sure that the
room where he wrote “ Through the Looking-
Glass” was not the sanctum where he prepared his
lectures and wrote his books on Logic and Higher
Mathematics; it might have served for an afternoon
frolic or a tea party of little girls; that would have
been in keeping, as probably he received the under-
graduates in his sanctum.
As for the other two sitting rooms, “ let's pre-
tend,” as Alice herself says, that one was dedicated
to the writing of poetry, and the other to the inven-
tion of games and puzzles; he had quite enough
work of all kinds on hand to keep every room
thoroughly aired. We shall hear about these rooms
again from little girls whose greatest delight it was
to visit them. What we want to do now is to
picture Lewis Carroll in his new quarters, energetic-
ally pushing Alice through the Looking-Glass, while
at the same time he was busily writing “ Phantas-
magoria,” a queer ghost poem which attracted

140
much attention. It was published with a great
many shorter poems in the early part of 1869, pre-
ceding the publication of the new “ Alice," on which
he was working chapter by chapter with Sir John
Tenniel.
It was wonderful how closely the artist followed
the queer mazes of Lewis Carroll's thought. He
was able to draw the strange animals and stranger
situations just as the author wished to have them,
but there came a point at which the artist halted and
shook his head.
“I don't like the 'Wasp Chapter,'” was the sub-
stance of a letter from artist to author, and he
could not see his way to illustrating it. Indeed,
even with his skill, a wasp in a wig was rather a dif-
ficult subject and, as Lewis Carroll wouldn't take
off the wig, they were at a standstill. Rather than
sacrifice the wig it was determined to cut out the
chapter, and as it was really not so good as the other
chapters, it was not much loss to the book, which
rounded out very easily to just the dozen, full of the
cleverest illustrations Tenniel ever drew. It was
his last attempt at illustrating: the gift deserted him
suddenly and never returned. His original cartoon
work was always excellent, but the “ Alices ” had
brought him a peculiar fame which would never
have come to him through the columns of Punch,
and Lewis Carroll, always generous in praising
others, was quick to recognize the master hand
which followed his thought. There was something

in every stroke which appealed to the laughter of
children, and the power of producing unthinkable
animals amounted almost to inspiration. No doubt
there may be illustrators of the present day quite as
clever in their line, but Lewis Carroll stood alone in
a new world which he created; there were none
before him and none followed him, and his Knight
of the Brush was faithful and true.
“ Through the Looking-Glass” was published in
1871, and at once took its place as another “ Alice"
classic. There is much to be said about this book
—so much, indeed, that it requires a chapter of its
own, for many agree in considering it even more of
a masterpiece than “ Alice in Wonderland," and
though more carefully planned out than its predeces-
sor, there is no hint of hard labor in the brilliant
nonsense.
Those who have known and loved the man recog-
nize in the “ Alices " the best and most attractive
part of him. In spite of his persistent stammering,
he was a ready and natural talker, and when in the
mood he could be as irresistibly funny as any of the
characters in his book. His knowledge of English
was so great that he could take the most ordinary
expression and draw from it a new and unexpected
meaning; his habit of " playing upon words” is one
of his very funniest traits. When the Mock Turtle
said in that memorable conversation with Alice
which we all know by heart:“no wise fish would go
anywhere without a porpoise,” he meant, of course,

142
W
V. So they get them osition of
without a purpose, and having made the joke he re-
fused explanations and seemed offended that Alice
needed any. Another humorous idea was that the
whitings always held their tails in their mouths.
“The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “ that they
would go with the lobsters to the dance. So they
were thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long
way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths.
So they couldn't get them out again. That's all.”
This is not the natural position of the whiting, as
we all know, but the device of the fishmonger to
make his windows attractive, and Alice herself came
perilously near saying that she had eaten them for
dinner cooked in that fashion and sprinkled over
with bread crumbs. It was just Lewis Carroll's
funny way of viewing things, in much the same
fashion that one of his child-friends would look at
them. His was a real child's mind, full of wonder
depths where all sorts of impossible things existed,
two-sided triangles, parallel lines that met in a point,
whitings who had their tails in their mouths, and
many other delightful contradictions, some of which
he gave to the world. Others he stored away for
the benefit of the numberless little girls who had
permission to rummage in the store-house.
" Alice through the Looking-Glass” made its
bow with a flourish of trumpets. All the “ Non-
sense" world was waiting for it, and for once ex-
pectation was not disappointed and the author
found himself almost hidden beneath his mantle of

glory. People praised him so much that it is quite
a wonder his head was not completely turned.
Henry Kingsley, the novelist, thought it “perfectly
splendid," and indeed many others fully agreed with
him.
As for the children and after all they were his
real critics—the little girl who thought “ Through
the Looking-Glass ” “ stupider” than Wonderland,
voiced the popular sentiment. Those who were old
enough to read the book themselves soon knew by
heart all the fascinating poetry, and if the story had
no other merit, “The Jabberwocky” alone would
have been enough to recommend it. Of all the
queer fancies of a queer mind, this poem was the
most remarkable, and even to-day, with all our
clever verse-makers and nonsense-rhymers, no one
has succeeded in getting out of apparently meaning-
less words so much real meaning and genuine fun
as are to be found in this one little classic.
Many people have tried in vain to trace its origin;
one enterprising lady insisted on calling it a trans-
lation from the German. Someone else decided
there was a Scandinavian flavor about it, so he
called it a “ Saga.” Mr. A. A. Vansittart, of Trin-
ity College, Cambridge, made an excellent Latin
translation of it, and hundreds of others have
puzzled over the many “wrapped up” meanings in
the strange words.
We shall meet the poem later on and discuss its
many wonders. At present we must follow Charles

144
Dodgson back into his sanctum where he was
eagerly pursuing a new course — the study of
anatomy and physiology. He was presented with a
skeleton, and laying in the proper supply of books,
he set to work in earnest. He bought a little book
called “ What to do in Emergencies " and perfected
himself in what we know to-day as “ First Aid to
the Injured.” He accumulated in this way some
very fine medical and surgical books, and had more
than one occasion to use his newly acquired knowl-
edge.
Most men labor all their lives to gain fame.
Lewis Carroll was a hard worker, but fame came to
him without an effort. Along his line of work he
took his “ vorpal” sword in hand and severed all the
knots and twists of the mathematical Jabberwocky.
It was when he played that he reached the heights;
when he touched the realm of childhood he was all
conquering, for he was in truth a child among them,
and every child felt the youthfulness in his glance,
in the wave of his hand, in the fitting of his mood to
theirs, and his entire sympathy in all their small joys
sorrows—such great important things in their child-
world. He often declared that children were three
fourths of his life, and it seems indeed a pity that
none of his own could join the band of his ardent
admirers.
Here he was, a young man still in spite of his
forty years, holding as his highest delight the power
he possessed of giving happiness to other people's

children. Yet had anyone ventured to voice this re-
gret, he would have replied like many another in
his position :
“Children-bless them! Of course I love them.
I prefer other people's children. All delight and no
bother. One runs a fearful risk with one's own."
And he might have added with his whimsical smile,
“ And supposing they might have been boys!”

CHAPTER IX.
MORE OF “ ALICE THROUGH THE LOOKING-
GLASS.”
7 IX years had passed since Alice took her
trip through Wonderland, and, strange
to say, she had not grown very much
older, for Time has the trick of standing
still in Fairyland, and when Lewis Carroll pushed
her through the Looking-Glass she told everyone she
met on the other side that she was seven years and
six months old, not very much older, you see, than
the Alice of Long Ago, with the elf-locks and the
dreamy eyes. The real Alice was in truth six years
older now, but real people never count in Fairyland,
and surely no girl of a dozen years or more would
have been able to squeeze through the other side of
a Looking-Glass. Still, though so very young, Alice
was quite used to travel, and knew better how to
deal with all the queer people she met after her ex-
periences in Wonderland.
Mirrors are strange things. Alice had often won-
dered what lay behind the big one over the parlor
mantel, and wondering with Alice meant doing,
146

for presto! up she climbed to the mantelshelf. It
was easy enough to push through, for she did not
have to use the slightest force, and the glass melted
at her touch into a sheet of mist and there she was
on the other side!
In the interval between the two “ Alices," a cer-
tain poetic streak had become strongly marked in
Lewis Carroll. To him a child's soul was like the
mirror behind which little Alice peeped out from its
“other side," and gave us the reflection of her child-
thoughts.
“Only a dream,” we may say, but then child-life
is dream-life. So much is “make-believe” that
"every day” is dipped in its golden light. It was
a dainty fancy to hold us spellbound at the mirror,
and many a little girl, quite“ unbeknownst ” to the
“grown-ups," has tried her small best to squeeze
through the looking-glass just as Alice did. In the
days of our grandmothers, when the cheval glass
swung in a frame, the “make believe " came easier,
for one could creep under it or behind it, instead of
through it, with much the same result. But now-
adays, with looking-glasses built in the walls, how
can one pretend properly!
If fairies only knew what examples they were
to the average small girl and small boy, they would
be very careful about the things they did. Fortu-
nately they are old-fashioned fairies, and have not
yet learned to ride in automobiles or flying-ma-
chines, else there's no telling what might happen.

148
Alice was always lucky in finding herself in the
very best society-nothing more or less than roy-
alty itself. But the Royal Court of Cards was not
to be compared with the Royal Court of Chessmen,
which she found behind the fireplace when she
jumped down on the other side of the mantel. Of
course, it was only “pretending ” from the begin-
ning; a romp with the kittens toward the close of
a short winter's day, a little girl curled up in an
armchair beside the fire with the kitten in her lap,
while Dinah, the mother cat, sat near by washing
little Snowdrop's face, the snow falling softly with-
out, Alice was just the least bit drowsy, and so she
talked to keep awake.
“Do you hear the snow against the window
panes, Kitty? How nice and soft it sounds! Just
as if some one was kissing the window all over
outside. I wonder if the snow loves the trees and
fields that it kisses them so gently? And then it
covers them up snug you know with a white quilt;
and perhaps it says, 'Go to sleep, darlings, till the
summer comes again,' and when they wake up in
the summer, Kitty, they dress themselves all in
green, and dance about whenever the wind blows.
'Oh, that's very pretty!' cried Alice, dropping the
ball of worsted to clap her hands. 'I do so wish
it was true. I'm sure the woods look sleepy in the
autumn when the leaves are getting brown.'”.
. We are sure, too, Alice was getting sleepy in the
glow of the firelight with the black kitten purring

a lullaby on her lap. She had probably been play-
ing with the Chessmen and pretending as usual, so
it is small wonder that the heavy eyes closed, and
the black kitten grew into the shape of the Red
Queen—and so the story began.
It was the work of a few minutes to be on speak-
ing terms with the whole Chess Court which Alice
found assembled. The back of the clock on the
mantelshelf looked down upon the scene with the
grinning face of an old man, and even the vase wore
a smiling visage. There was a good fire burning
in this looking-glass grate, but the flames went the
other way of course, and down among the ashes,
back of the grate, the Chessmen were walking about
in pairs.
Sir John Tenniel's picture of the assembled Chess-
men is very clever. The Red King and the Red
Queen are in the foreground. The White Bishop
is taking his ease on a lump of coal, with a smaller
lump for a footstool, while the two Castles are en-
joying a little promenade near by. In the back-
ground are the Red and White Knights and Bish-
ops and all the Pawns. He has put so much life and
expression into the faces of the little Chessmen that
we cannot help regarding them as real people, and
we cannot blame Alice for taking them very much in
earnest.
She naturally found difficulty in accustoming her-
self to Looking-Glass Land, and the first thing she
had to learn was how to read Looking-Glass fashion.

150
She happened to pick up a book that she found on a
table in the Looking-Glass Room, but when she
tried to read it, it seemed to be written in an un-
known language. Here is what she saw:
.YXIOWAJALAL
a9vog ydsila sds bas gillind eswT*
:9d8w gds ni aldmig bas 9788 bia
29Vogorod gd: 979W remim IIA
.9d67gjuo ediár 9mom od baA
Then a bright thought occurred to her, and hold-
ing the book up before a looking-glass, this is what
she read in quite clear English, no matter how it
looks, for there is certainly no intelligent child who
could fail to understand it.
JABBERWOCKY.
'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
All mimsy were the borogoves,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
“ Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
The frumious Bandersnatch!”
He took his vorpal sword in hand:
Long time the manxome foe he sought-
So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
And stood awhile in thought.

And, as in uffish thought he stood,
The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
And burbled as it came !
One, two! One, two! And through and through
The vorpal blade went snicker-snack !
He left it dead, and with its head
He went galumphing back.
“And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!”
He chortled in his joy.
'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
All mimsy were the borogoves,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
Alice of course puzzled over this for a long time.
“' It seems very pretty,' she said when she had fin-
ished it, but it's rather hard to understand!' (You
see she didn't like to confess, even to herself, that she
couldn't make it out at all.) 'Somehow it seems to
fill my head with ideas, only I don't exactly know
what they are! However, somebody killed some-
thing—that's clear at any rate.'”.
For pure cleverness the poem has no equal, we
will not say in the English language, but in any lan-
guage whatsoever, for it seems to be a medley of
all languages. Lewis Carroll composed it on the
spur of the moment during an evening spent with his
11

152
cousins, the Misses Wilcox, and with his natural gift
of word-making the result is most surprising. The
only verse that really needs explanation is the first,
which is also the last of the poem. Out of the
twenty-three words the verse contains, there are but
twelve which are pure, honest English.
In Mr. Collingwood's article in the Strand Maga-
zine we have Lewis Carroll's explanation of the
remaining eleven, written down in learned fashion,
brimful of his own quaint humor. For a real guide
it cannot be excelled, and, though we laugh at the
absurdities, we learn the lesson. Here it is:
Brillig (derived from the verb to bryl or broil), “the
time of broiling dinner-i. e., the close of the afternoon."
Slithy (compounded of slimy and lithe), “smooth and
active.”
Tove (a species of badger). “They had smooth, white
hair, long hind legs, and short horns like a stag; lived
chiefly on cheese.”
Gyre (derived from Gayour or Giaour, a dog), “to
scratch like a dog."
Gymble (whence Gimblet), " to screw out holes in any-
thing."
Wabe (derived from the verb to swab or soak), “the
side of a hill” (from its being soaked by the rain).
Mimsy (whence mimserable and miserable), “unhappy."
Borogove, “an extinct kind of parrot. They had no
wings, beaks turned up, and made their nests under sun-
dials; lived on veal.”
Mome (hence solemome, solemne, and solemn),
“grave."
Raths. “A species of land turtle, head erect, mouth.

like a shark; the forelegs curved out so that the animal
walked on his knees; smooth green body; lived on swal-
lows and oysters."
Outgrabe (past tense of the verb to outgribe; it is
connected with the old verb to grike or shrike, from
which are derived “ shriek” and “creak”), “ squeaked.”
“Hence the literal English of the passage is-
' It was evening, and the smooth active badgers
were scratching and boring holes in the hillside; all
unhappy were the parrots, and the green turtles
squeaked out.' There were probably sun-dials on
the top of the hill, and the borogoves were afraid
that their nests would be undermined. The hill
was probably full of the nests of 'raths' which ran
out squeaking with fear on hearing the 'toves'
scratching outside. This is an obscure yet deeply
affecting relic of ancient poetry.”
(Croft—1855. Ed.)
This lucid explanation was evidently one of the
editor's contributions to Misch-Masch during his
college days, so this classic poem must have “sim-
mered” for many years before Lewis Carroll put it
“ Through the Looking-Glass.” But when Alice
questioned the all-wise Humpty-Dumpty on the sub-
ject he gave some simpler definitions. When asked
the meaning of “mome raths,” he replied:
“ Well, rath is a sort of green pig; but mome
I'm not certain about. I think it's short for 'from
home,' meaning they'd lost their way, you know.”

154
Lewis Carroll called such words “ portmanteaus ”
because there were two meanings wrapped up in one
word, and all through “ Jabberwocky” these queer
" portmanteau” words give us the key to the real
meaning of the poem. In the preface to a collection
of his poems, he gives us the rule for the building
of these “ portmanteau " words. He says: “Take
the two words ' fuming' and 'furious. Make up
your mind that you will say both words, but leave it
unsettled which you will say first. Now open your
mouth and speak. If your thoughts incline ever so
little toward 'fuming' you will say 'fuming-furi-
ous'; if they turn by even a hair's breadth toward
' furious' you will say “furious-fuming’; but if you
have that rarest of gifts, a perfectly balanced mind,
you will say 'frumious.'”
It is hard to tell what he had in mind when he
wrote of this deed of daring—for such it was. Pos-
sibly, St. George and the Dragon inspired him, and
like the best of preachers he turned his sermon into
wholesome nonsense. The Jabberwock itself was a
most awe-inspiring creature, and Tenniel's draw-
ing is most deliciously blood-curdling; half-snake,
half-dragon, with “jaws that bite and claws that
scratch,” it is yet saved from being utterly terrible
by having some nice homely looking buttons on his
waistcoat and upon his three-clawed feet, something
very near akin to shoes.
The anxious father bids his brave son good-bye,
little dreaming that he will see him again.

“ Beware the Jubjub bird—and shun
The frumious Bandersnatch”
brave boy woe time to puzzle manteau”
are his last warning words, mostly “portmanteau”
words, if one takes the time to puzzle them out.
Then the brave boy goes forth into the “ tulgey
wood” and stands in “uffish thought " until with a
“whiffling" sound the “burbling” Jabberwock is
upon him.
Oh, the excitement of that moment when the
“ vorpal” sword went“ snicker-snack” through the
writhing neck of the monster! Then one can
properly imagine the youth galloping in triumph
(hence the “portmanteau” word “ galumphing," the
first syllable of gallop and the last syllable of tri-
umph) back to the proud papa, who says: “ Come
to my arms, my 'beamish boy'... and 'chortles
in his joy.'” But all the time these wonderful
things are happening, just around the corner, as it
were, the “ toves ” and the “borogoves" and the
“mome raths" were pursuing their never-ending
warfare on the hillside, saying, with Tennyson's
Brook:
“Men may come and men may go
But we go on forever,"
no matter how many “ Jabberwocks " are slain nor
how many “beamish boys” take their “ vorpal
swords in hand.”
In preparing the second "Alice" book for publica-

156
tion, Lewis Carroll's first idea was to use the “ Jab-
berwocky” illustration as a frontispiece, but, in spite
of the reassuring buttons and shoes, he was afraid
younger children might be “scared off” from the
real enjoyment of the book. So he wrote to about
thirty mothers of small children asking their advice
on the matter; they evidently voted against it, for, as
we all know, the White Knight on his horse with its
many trappings, with Alice walking beside him
through the woods, was the final selection, and the
smallest child has grown to love the silly old fellow
who tumbled off his steed every two minutes, and
did many other dear, ridiculous things that only
children could appreciate.
Looking-glass walking puzzled Alice at first quite
as much as looking-glass writing or reading. If
she tried to walk downstairs in the looking-glass
house “she just kept the tips of her fingers on the
hand rail and floated gently down, without even
touching the stairs with her feet.” Then when she
tried to climb to the top of the hill to get a peep
into the garden, she found that she was always
going backwards and in at the front door again.
Finally, after many attempts, she reached the
wished-for spot, and found herself among a talkative
cluster of flowers, who all began to criticise her in
the most impertinent way.
“Oh, Tiger-lily!” said Alice, addressing herself
to one that was waving gracefully about in the wind,
“I wish you could talk!”
" Way.

“ We can talk," said the Tiger-lily, “when
there's anybody worth talking to "... At length,
as the Tiger-lily went on waving about, she spoke
again in a timid voice, almost in a whisper :
“And can all the flowers talk?”
"As well as you can," said the Tiger-lily, “and
a great deal louder.”
" It isn't manners for us to begin, you know,"
said the Rose, “and I really was wondering when
you'd speak! Said I to myself, “Her face has got
some sense in it though it's not a clever one!' Still
you've the right color and that goes a long way."
“I don't care about the color," the Tiger-lily re-
marked. “If only her petals curled up a little more,
she'd be all right.”.
Alice didn't like being criticised, so she began
asking questions:
“Aren't you sometimes frightened at being
planted out here with nobody to take care of you?”
“There's the tree in the middle,” said the Rose.
“ What else is it good for?”
“ But what could it do if any danger came?”
Alice asked.
“ It could bark," said the Rose.
“ It says 'bough-wough,'” cried a Daisy.
“That's why its branches are called boughs.”
“Didn't you know that ? ” cried another Daisy.
And here they all began shouting together.
Lewis Carroll loved this play upon words, and
children, strange to say, loved it too, and were quick

158
u going
.
all the thions, and
or
to see the point of his puns. The Red Queen, whom
Alice met shortly after this, was a most dictatorial
person.
“Where do you come from?” she asked, “and
where are you going? Look up, speak nicely, and
don't twiddle your fingers all the time."
Alice attended to all these directions, and ex-
plained as well as she could that she had lost her
way.
"I don't know what you mean by your way,” said
the Queen. “ All the ways about here belong to
me, but why did you come out here at all?" she
added in a kinder tone. “ Curtsey while you're
thinking what to say. It saves time.”
Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too
much in awe of the Queen to disbelieve it.
“I'll try it when I go home," she thought to her-
self, “ the next time I'm a little late for dinner."
Evidently some little girls were often late for
dinner.
“It's time for you to answer now," the Queen
said, looking at her watch; “open your mouth a
little wider when you speak and always say “Your
Majesty.'”
“I only wanted to see what your garden was like,
your Majesty."
“That's right,” said the Queen, patting her on the
head, which Alice didn't like at all, “ though when
you say 'garden,' I've seen gardens compared with
which this would be a wilderness.'

Alice didn't dare to argue the point, but went on:
“ And I thought I'd try and find my way to the top
of that hill ”
“When you say 'hill,”” the Queen interrupted,
“ I could show you hills in comparison with which
you'd call this a valley."
“No, I shouldn't,” said Alice, surprised into con-
tradicting her at last. “A hill can't be a valley you
know. That would be nonsense”.
The Red Queen shook her head.
“ You may call it 'nonsense' if you like," she
said, “ but I've heard nonsense compared with which
that would be as sensible as a dictionary!”
Which last remark seemed to settle the matter,
for Alice had nothing further to say on the subject.
Nonsense, indeed; and what delightful nonsense
it is! Is it any wonder that the little girls for whom
Lewis Carroll labored so lovingly should reward
him with their laughter?
Alice entered Checker-Board Land in the Red
Queen's company; she was apprenticed as a pawn,
with the promise that when she entered the eighth
square she would become a queen [she probably was
confusing chess with checkers), and the Red Queen
explained how she would travel.
“ A pawn goes two squares in its first move, you
know, so you'll go very quickly through the third
square, by railway, I should think, and you'll find
yourself in the fourth square in no time. Well, that
square belongs to Tweedledum and Tweedledee, and

160
the fifth is mostly water, the sixth belongs to
Humpty Dumpty, ... the seventh square is all
forest. However, one of the knights will show you
the way, and in the eighth square we shall be queens
together, and its all feasting and fun.”
The rest of her adventures occurred on those
eight squares—sometimes in company with the Red
Queen or the White Queen or both. Things went
more rapidly than in Wonderland, the people were
brisker and smarter. When the Red Queen left her
on the border of Checker-Board Land, she gave her
this parting advice:
“ Speak in French when you can't think of the
English for a thing, turn out your toes as you walk,
and remember who you are!”.
How many little girls have had the same advice
from their governesses or their mamma—“Turn
out your toes when you walk, and remember who
you are!”
This is what made Lewis Carroll so irresistibly
funny—the way he had of bringing in the most
common everyday expressions in the most uncom-
mon, unexpected places. Only in Alice's case it
took her quite a long time to remember who she
was, just because the Red Queen told her not to
forget. Children are very queer about that—little
girls in particular—at least those that Lewis Carroll
knew, and he certainly was acquainted with a great
many who did remarkably queer things.
Alice's meeting with the two fat little men named
W

Tweedledum and Tweedledee recalled to her mem-
ory the old rhyme:
Tweedledum and Tweedledee
Agreed to have a battle;
For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
Had spoiled his nice new rattle.
Just then flew down a monstrous crow,
As black as a tar barrel;
Which frightened both the heroes so,
They quite forgot their quarrel.
Fierce little men they were, one with Dum em- .
broidered on his collar, the other showing Dee on
his. They were not accustomed to good society nor
fine grammar. They were exactly alike as they
stood motionless before her, their arms about each
other.
“I know what you're thinking about,” said
Tweedledum,“ but it isn't so—nohow.” [Behold
the beautiful grammar.]
“Contrariwise,” continued Tweedledee, “if it
was so, it might be; and if it were so, it would be;
but as it isn't, it ain't. That's logic.”
Now, Alice particularly wanted to know which
road to take out of the woods, but somehow or other
her polite question was never answered by either of
the funny little brothers. They were very sociable
and seemed most anxious to keep her with them, so ·
for her entertainment Tweedledum repeated that
beautiful and pathetic poem called :

162
THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER.
The sun was shining on the sea,
Shining with all his might;
He did his very best to make
The billows smooth and bright-
And this was odd, because it was
The middle of the night.
The moon was shining sulkily,
Because she thought the sun
Had got no business to be there
After the day was done-
“It's very rude of him," she said,
"To come and spoil the fun!”
The sea was wet as wet could be,
The sands were dry as dry,
You could not see a cloud, because
No cloud was in the sky;
No birds were flying overhead-
There were no birds to fly.
The Walrus and the Carpenter
Were walking close at hand;
They wept like anything to see
Such quantities of sand;
“If this were only cleared away,"
They said, “it would be grand!”
“If seven maids with seven mops
Swept it for half a year,
Do you suppose," the Walrus said,
“That they would get it clear?”
“I doubt it,” said the Carpenter,
And shed a bitter tear.

Then comes the sad and sober part of the tale,
when the Oysters were tempted to stroll along the
beach, in company with these wily two, who lured
them far away from their snug ocean beds.
The Walrus and the Carpenter
Walked on a mile or so,
And then they rested on a rock
Conveniently low;
And all the little Oysters stood
And waited in a row.
“The time has come,” the Walrus said,
“To talk of many things;
Of shoes, and ships, and sealing-wax-
Of cabbages and kings;
And why the sea is boiling hot,
And whether pigs have wings.”
“But wait a bit,” the Oysters cried,
“Before we have our chat;
For some of us are out of breath,
And all of us are fat!”.
“No hurry!” said the Carpenter.
They thanked him much for that.
“A loaf of bread,” the Walrus said,
"Is what we chiefly need;
Pepper and vinegar besides
Are very good, indeed;
Now, if you're ready, Oysters, dear,
We can begin to feed.”
Then the Oysters became terrified, as they saw all
these grewsome preparations, and their fate loomed

164
up before them. So the two old weeping hypocrites
sat on the rocks and calmly devoured their late
companions.
" It seems a shame," the Walrus said,
“To play them such a trick,
After we've brought them out so far,
And made them trot so quick ! ”
The Carpenter said nothing but,
“The butter's spread too thick!”
“I weep for you,” the Walrus said,
“I deeply sympathize.”.
With sobs and tears he sorted out
Those of the largest size,
Holding his pocket-handkerchief
Before his streaming eyes.
“O Oysters,” said the Carpenter,
“You've had a pleasant run!
Shall we be trotting home again?”
But answer came there none.
And this was scarcely odd, because
They'd eaten every one.
The poor dear little Oysters! How any little
girl, with a heart under her pinafore, could read
these lines unmoved it is hard to say. Think of
those innocent young dears, standing before these
dreadful ogres.
All eager for the treat;
Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
Their shoes were clean and neat;
And this was odd, because, you know,
They hadn't any feet.

All the same, Tenniel has made most attractive
pictures of them, feet and all. And think-oh,
horror! of their supplying the treat! It was indeed
an awful tragedy. Yet behind it all there lurks some
fun, though Lewis Carroll was too clever to let us
quite into his secret. All the young ones want is the
story, but those who are old enough to love their
Dickens and to look for his special characters out-
side of his books will certainly recognize in the
Walrus the hypocritical Mr. Pecksniff, whose tears
flowed on every occasion when he was not otherwise
employed in robbing his victims, and other little
pleasantries. And as for the Carpenter, there is
something very scholarly in the set of his cap and
the combing of his scant locks; possibly a caricature
of some shining light of Oxford, for we know there
were many in his books. Indeed, the whole poem
may be something of an allegory, representing ex-
amination; the Oysters, the undergraduate victims
before the college faculty (the Walrus and the Car-
penter) who are just ready to "eat 'em alive "-
poor innocent undergraduates!
But whatever the hidden meaning, Tweedledum
and Tweedledee were not the sort of people to look
deep into things, and Alice, being a little girl and
very partial to oysters, thought the Walrus and the
Carpenter were very unpleasant characters and had
no sympathy with them at all.
Dreaming by a ruddy blaze in a big armchair
keeps one much busier than if one fell asleep in a
uates!

166
rocking boat or on the river bank on a golden sum-
mer day.
The scenes and all the company changed so
often in Looking-Glass Land that Alice had all she
could do to keep pace with her adventures. For
you see all this time she was only a pawn, moving
over an immense chess-board from square to square,
until in the end she should be made queen. The
White Queen whom Alice met shortly was a very
lopsided person, quite unlike the Red Queen, who
was neat enough no matter how sharp her tongue.
Alice had to fix her hair, and straighten her shawl,
and set her right and tidy.
"Really, you should have a lady's maid," she re-
marked.
" I'm sure I'll take you with pleasure,” the Queen
said. “Twopence a week, and jam every other
nu.
day.”
Alice couldn't help laughing as she said:
“I don't want you to hire me, and I don't care for
jam."
" It's very good jam," said the Queen.
“Well, I don't want any to-day at any rate."
“ You couldn't have it if you did want it,” the
Queen said. “The rule is—jam to-morrow and
jam yesterday, but never jam to-day.”
“ It must come sometimes to “jam to-day,'”
Alice objected.
"No, it can't,” said the Queen. “It's jam every
other day; to-day isn't any other day, you know.”

“I don't understand you,” said Alice. “ It's
dreadfully confusing!”.
“That's the effect of living backwards,” the
Queen said, kindly. “ It always makes one a little
giddy at first—"
“Living backwards!” Alice remarked in great
astonishment. “I never heard of such a thing!”
“But there's one great advantage in it, that
one's memory works both ways.”
“I'm sure mine only works one way,” Alice re-
marked. “I can't remember things before they
happen."
" It's a poor memory that only works backwards,"
the Queen remarked.
“What sort of things do you remember best?”
Alice ventured to ask.
“Oh, the things that happened the week after
next,” the Queen replied in a careless tone. “For
instance, now,” she went on, sticking a large piece
of plaster on her finger as she spoke, “ there's the
king's messenger. He's in prison now, being pun-
ished, and the trial doesn't begin till next Wednes-
day; and of course the crime comes last of all.”
Then the Queen for further illustration began to
scream
“Oh, oh, oh!” shouted the Queen...." My
finger's bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!”
Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a
steam engine that Alice had to hold both her hands
over her ears.
12

168
“What is the matter?” she said. ...“ Have
you pricked your finger?”
“I haven't pricked it yet,” the Queen said, “ but
I soon shall-oh, oh, oh!”
“When do you expect to do it?” Alice asked,
feeling very much inclined to laugh.
“When I fasten my shawl again,” the poor Queen
groaned out, “ the brooch will come undone directly.
Oh, oh!” As she said the words the brooch flew
open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it and tried
to clasp it again.
“Take care!” cried Alice, “ you're holding it all
crooked!” and she caught at the brooch; but it was
too late; the pin had slipped, and the Queen had
pricked her finger.
“That accounts for the bleeding, you see," she
said to Alice, with a smile. “Now you understand
the way things happen here."
Alice's meeting with Humpty-Dumpty in the
sixth square has gone down in history. It has been
played in nurseries and in private theatricals, and
many ingenious Humpty-Dumptys have been fash-
ioned by clever people.
Possibly the dear old rhyme which generations of
childhood have handed about as a riddle is respon-
sible for our great interest in Humpty-Dumpty.
Humpty-Dumpty sat on the wall,
Humpty-Dumpty had a great fall,
All the King's horses and all the King's men,
Couldn't put Humpty-Dumpty in his place again.

This is an old version, but modern children have
made a better ending, thus:
Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty up again.
Then there's a mysterious pause, and some eager
small boy or girl asks, “Now what is it?” and be-
fore one has time to answer, someone calls out-
“It's an egg; it's an egg!” and the riddle is a
riddle no longer.
One clever mechanical Humpty was made of
barrel hoops covered with stiff paper and muslin.
The eyes, nose, and mouth were connected with vari-
ous tapes, which the inventor had in charge behind
the scenes, and so well did he work them that
Humpty in his hands turned out a fine imitation of
the Humpty-Dumpty Sir John Tenniel has made us
remember; the same Humpty Dumpty who asked
Alice her name and her business, and who informed
her proudly that if he did tumble off the wall, “The
King has promised me with his very own mouth-
to-to_"
“To send all his horses and all his men—" Alice
interrupted rather unwisely.
“Now I declare that's too bad!” Humpty-
Dumpty cried, breaking into a sudden passion.
“ You've been listening at doors, and behind trees,
and down chimneys, or you wouldn't have known
it.”
“I haven't, indeed!” Alice said, very gently.
“It's in a book.”

170
“Ah, well! They may write such things in a
book," Humpty-Dumpty said in a calmer tone.
“That's what you call a History of England, that
is. Now take a good look at me. I'm one that has
spoken to a King, I am; mayhap you'll never see
such another; and to show you I'm not proud you
may shake hands with me ..."
“Yes, all his horses and all his men,” Humpty-
Dumpty went on. “They'd pick me up in a minute,
they would. However, this conversation is going
on a little too fast; let's go back to the last remark
but one."
Such a nice, common old chap is Humpty-
Dumpty, so “stuck-up” because he has spoken to a
King; and argue! Well, Alice never heard any-
thing like it before, and found difficulty in keeping
up a conversation that was disputed every step of
the way. She found him worse than the Cheshire
Cat or even the Duchess for that matter, and not
half so well-bred.
He too favored Alice with the following poem,
which he assured her was written entirely for her
amusement, and here it is, with enough of Lewis
Carroll's “ nonsense" in it to let us know where it
came from:
In winter, when the fields are white,
I sing this song for your delight:-
In spring, when woods are getting green,
I'll try and tell you what I mean:

In summer, when the days are long,
Perhaps you'll understand the song:
In autumn, when the leaves are brown,
Take pen and ink, and write it down.
I sent a message to the fish:
I told them: “ This is what I wish.”
The little fishes of the sea,
They sent an answer back to me.
The little fishes' answer was:
“We cannot do it, Sir, because
I sent to them again to say:
“ It will be better to obey."
The fishes answered, with a grin:
“Why, what a temper you are in!”
I told them once, I told them twice:
They would not listen to advice.
I took a kettle large and new,
Fit for the deed I had to do.
My heart went hop, my heart went thump:
I filled the kettle at the pump.
Then someone came to me and said:
“ The little fishes are in bed.”
I said to him, I said it plain:
" Then you must wake them up again."

172
I said it very loud and clear:
I went and shouted in his ear.
But he was very stiff and proud:
He said: “You needn't shout so loud!”
And he was very proud and stiff :
He said: “I'd go and wake them, if-
"
I took a corkscrew from the shelf;
I went to wake them up myself.
And when I found the door was locked,
I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.
And when I found the door was shut,
I tried to turn the handle, but
With which highly satisfactory ending Humpty re-
marked:
“That's all. Good-bye.”
Alice got up and held out her hand,
“Good-bye till we meet again,” she said, as cheer-
fully as she could.
“I shouldn't know you if we did meet,” Humpty-
Dumpty replied in a discontented tone, giving her
one of his fingers to shake. “You're so exactly like
other people.”
The next square- the seventh— took Alice
through the woods. Here she met some old friends:
the Mad Hatter and the White Rabbit of Wonder-
land fame, mixed in with a great many new beings,
including the Lion and the Unicorn, who, as the old

ballad tells us, “were fighting for the crown ”; and
then as the Red Queen had promised from the be-
ginning, the White Knight-after a battle with the
Red Knight who held Alice prisoner—took her in
charge to guide her through the woods. Whoever
has read the humorous and yet pathetic story of
“Don Quixote ” will see at once where Lewis Car-
roll found his gentle, valiant old White Knight and
his horse, so like yet so unlike the famous steed
Rosenante.
He, too, had a song for Alice, which he called
“The Aged, Aged Man,” and which he sang to her,
set to very mechancholy music. It is doubtful if
Alice understood it for she wasn't thinking of age,
you see. She was only seven years and six months
old, and probably paid no attention. She was think-
ing instead of the strange kindly smile of the knight,
“the setting sun gleaming through his hair and
shining on his armor in a blaze of light that quite
dazzled her; the horse quietly moving about with
the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the
grass at her feet, and the black shadows of the forest
behind.” Certainly Lewis Carroll could paint a pic-
ture to remain with us always. The poem is rather
too long to quote here, but the experiences of this
“Aged, Aged Man" are well worth reading.
Alice was now hastening toward the end of her
journey and events were tumbling over each other.
She had reached the eighth square, where, oh, joy!
a golden crown awaited her, also the Red Queen and

174
the White Queen in whose company she traveled
through the very stirring episodes of that very fa-
mous dinner party, when the candles on the table all
grew up to the ceiling, and the glass bottles each
took a pair of plates for wings, and forks for legs,
and went fluttering in all directions. Everything
was in the greatest confusion, and when the White
Queen disappeared in the soup tureen, and the soup
ladle began walking up the table toward Alice's
chair, she could stand it no longer. She jumped up
“and seized the tablecloth with both hands; one
good pull, and plates, dishes, guests, and candles
came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.”
And then Alice began to shake the Red Queen as
the cause of all the mischief.
“ The Red Queen made no resistance whatever;
only her face grew very small, and her eyes got
large and green; and still, as Alice went on shaking
her, she kept on growing shorter, and fatter, and
softer, and rounder, and—and it really was a kitten
after all.”
And Alice, opening her eyes in the red glow of
the fire, lay snug in the armchair, while the Look-
ing-Glass on the mantel caught the reflection of a
very puzzled little face. The “ dream-child ” had
come back to everyday, and was trying to retrace
her journey as she lay there blinking at the firelight,
and wondering if, back of the blaze, the Chessmen
. were still walking to and fro.
And Lewis Carroll, as he penned the last words

of “ Alice's Adventures through the Looking-
Glass,” remembered once more the little girl who
had been his inspiration, and wrote a loving tribute
to her at the very end of the book, an acrostic on
her name—Alice Pleasance Liddell.
A boat, beneath a sunny sky
Lingering onward dreamily
In an evening of July.
Children three that nestle near,
Eager eye and willing ear,
Pleased a simple tale to hear.
Long has paled that sunny sky;
Echoes fade and memories die:
Autumn frosts have slain July.
Still she haunts me, phantomwise,
Alice moving under skies,
Never seen by waking eyes.
.
Children yet, the tale to hear,
Eager eye and willing ear,
Lovingly shall nestle near.
In a Wonderland they lie,
Dreaming as the days go by,
Dreaming as the summers die:
Ever drifting down the stream,
Lingering in the golden gleam,
Life, what is it but a dream?

CHAPTER X.
ca
HUNTING OF THE SNARK” AND OTHER
POEMS.
"
A
HERE is no doubt that the second
“ Alice” book was quite as successful as
the first, but regarding its merit there is
much difference of opinion. As a rule
the "grown-ups ” prefer it. They like the clever
situations and the quaint logic, no less than the very
evident good writing; but this of course did not in-
fluence the children in the least. They liked
“ Alice" and the pretty idea of her trip through
the Looking-Glass, but for real delight “ Wonder-
land” was big enough for them, and to whisk down
into a rabbit-hole on a summer's day was a much
easier process than squeezing through a looking-
glass at the close of a short winter's afternoon, not
being quite sure that one would not fall into the
fire on the other side.
The very care that Lewis Carroll took in the writ-
ing of this book deprived it of a certain charm of
originality which always clings to the pages of
“Wonderland.” Each chapter is so methodically
176

177
planned and so well carried out that, while we never
lose sight of the author and his cleverness, fairyland
does not seem quite so real as in the book which
was written with no plan at all, but the earnest de-
sire to please three children. Then again there was
a certain staidness in the prim little girl who pushed
her way through the Looking-Glass. And there
were no wonderful cakes marked “eat me," and
bottles marked “ drink me,” which kept the Won-
derland Alice in a perpetual state of growing or
shrinking; so the fact that nothing happened to
Alice at all during this second journey lessened its
interest somewhat for the young ones to whom con-
stant change is the spice of life. A very little girl,
while she might enjoy the flower chapter, and might
be tempted to build her own fanciful tales about the
rest of the garden, would not be so attracted toward
the insect chapter, which may possibly have been
written with the praiseworthy idea of teaching chil-
dren not to be afraid of these harmless buzzing
things that are too busy with their own concerns to
bother them.
There are, in truth, little “cut and dried”
speeches in the Looking-Glass “ Alice,” which we
do not find in “ Wonderland.” A real hand is mov-
ing the Chessman over the giant board, and the Red
and the White Queen often speak like automatic
toys. We miss the savage “ off with his head ” of
the Queen of Hearts, who, for all her cardboard
stiffness, seemed a thing of flesh and blood. But

178
the poetry in the two “ Alices” is of very much the
same quality.
In his prose “nonsense ” anyone might notice the
difference of years between the two books, but
Lewis Carroll's poetry never loses its youthful tone.
It was as easy for him to write verses as to teach
mathematics, and that was saying a good deal. It
was as easy for him to write verses at sixty as at
thirty, and that is saying even more. From the
time he could hold a pencil he could make a rhyme,
and his earlier editorial ventures, as we know, were
full of his own work which in after years made its
way to the public, either through the magazines or
in collection of poems, such as “Rhyme and Rea-
son,” “ Phantasmagoria,” and “ The Three Sunsets."
In The Train, that early English magazine before
mentioned, are several poems written by him and
signed by his newly borrowed name of Lewis Car-
roll, but they are very sentimental and high-flown, ut-
terly unlike anything he wrote either before or after.
Between the publication of “Through the Look-
ing-Glass” and “ The Hunting of the Snark” was
a period of five years, during which, according to
his usual custom, Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, in the
seclusion of Christ Church, calmly pursued his
scholarly way, smiling sedately over the literary an-
tics of Lewis Carroll, for the Rev. Charles was
a sober, over-serious bachelor, whose one aim
and object at that time was the proper treatment of
Euclid, for during those five years he wrote the

179
following pamphlets: “Symbols, etc., to be used in
Euclid Books I and II,” “ Number of Proposi-
tions in Euclid,” “Enunciations—Euclid I-VI,"
“ Euclid-Book V. Proved Algebraically," " Pre-
liminary Algebra and Euclid-Book V,” “Exam-
ples in Arithmetic," “ Euclid-Books I and II.”
He also wrote many other valuable pamphlets
concerning the government of Oxford and of Christ
Church in particular, for the retiring “ don” took a
keen interest in the University life, and his influence
was felt in many spicy articles and apt rhymes, usu-
ally brought forth as timely skits. Notes by an Ox-
ford Chiel, published at Oxford in 1874, included
much of this material, where his clever verses,
mostly satirical, generally hit the mark.
And all this while, Lewis Carroll was gathering
in the harvest yielded by the two “ Alices," and
planning more books for his child-friends, who, we
may be sure, were growing in numbers.
We find him at the Christmas celebration of 1874,
at Hatfield, the home of Lord Salisbury, as usual,
the central figure of a crowd of happy children. On
this occasion he told them the story of Prince Ug-
gug, which was afterwards a part of “ Sylvie and
Bruno.” Many of the chapters of this book had
been published as separate stories in Aunt Judy's
Magazine and other periodicals, and, as such, they
were very sweet and dainty as well as amusing.
It was Lewis Carroll's own special charm in telling
these stories which really lent them color and drew

180
the children; they lost much in print, for they lacked
the sturdy foundations of nonsense on which the
“ Alices” were built.
On March 29, 1876, “The Hunting of the
Snark” was published, a new effort in “nonsense"
verse-making, which stands side by side with “ Jab-
berwocky" in point of cleverness and interest.
The beauty of Lewis Carroll's “nonsense” was
that he never tried to be funny or “smart.” The
queer words and the still queerer ideas popped into
his head in the simplest way. His command of
language, including that important knowledge of
how to make “ portmanteau ” words, was his great-
est aid, and the poem which he called "An Agony in
Eight Fits” depends entirely upon the person who
reads it for the cleverness of its meaning. To chil-
dren it is one big fairy tale where the more ridicu-
lous the situations, the more true to the rules of
fairyland. The Snark, being a “portmanteau”
word, is a cross between a snake and a shark, hence
Snark, and the fact that he dedicated this wonderful
bit of word-making to a little girl, goes far to prove
that the poem was intended as much for children
as for “grown-ups."
The little girl in this instance was Gertrude Chat-
away, and the verses are an acrostic on her name:
Girt with a boyish garb for boyish task,
Eager she wields her spade: yet loves as well
Rest on a friendly knee, intent to ask
The tale he loves to tell.

181
Rude spirit of the seething outer strife,
Unmeet to read her pure and simple spright,
Deem, if you list, such hours a waste of life,
Empty of all delight!
Chat on, sweet maid, and rescue from annoy,
Hearts that by wiser talk are unbeguiled;
Ah, happy he who owns that tenderest joy,
The heart-love of a child !
Away, fond thoughts, and vex my soul no more!
Work claims my wakeful nights, my busy days,
Albeit bright memories of that sunlit shore
Yet haunt my dreaming gaze!
There was scarcely a little girl who claimed
friendship with Lewis Carroll who was not the
proud possessor of an acrostic poem written by him
-either on the title-page of some book that he had
given her, or as the dedication of some published
book of his own.
“ The Hunting of the Snark” owed its existence
to a country walk, when the last verse came sud-
denly into the mind of our poet:
"In the midst of the word he was trying to say,
In the midst of his laughter and glee,
He had softly and suddenly vanished away-
For the Snark was a Boojum, you see.”
In a very humorous preface to the book, Lewis
Carroll attempted some sort of an explanation,
which leaves us as much in the dark as ever. He
writes:

182
“If—and the thing is wildly possible—the charge
of writing nonsense was ever brought against the
author of this brief but instructive poem, it would
be based, I feel convinced, on the line:
“Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder some-
times.'
“In view of this painful possibility, I will not (as
I might) appeal indignantly to my other writings as
a proof that I am incapable of such a deed; I will
not (as I might) point to the strong moral purpose
of the poem itself, to the arithmetical principles so
cautiously inculcated in it, or to its noble teachings
in Natural History. I will take the more prosaic
course of simply explaining how it happened.
“ The Bellman, who was almost morbidly sensi-
tive about appearances, used to have the bowsprit
unshipped once or twice a week to be revarnished;
and more than once it happened, when the time
came for replacing it, that no one on board could
remember which end of the ship it belonged to.
They knew it was not of the slightest use to appeal
to the Bellman about it—he would only refer to his
Naval Code and read out in pathetic tones Admiralty
Instructions which none of them had ever been able
to understand, so it generally ended in its being fast-
ened on anyhow across the rudder. The Helmsman
used to stand by with tears in his eyes; he knew it
was all wrong, but, alas! Rule 4, of the Code, “No
one shall speak to the man at the helm,' had been

183
completed by the Bellman himself with the words,
' and the man at the helm shall speak to no one,'
so remonstrance was impossible and no steering
could be done till the next varnishing day. During
these bewildering intervals the ship usually sailed
backward.”
Is it any wonder that a poem, based upon such an
explanation, should be a perfect bundle of nonsense ?
But we know from experience that Lewis Carroll's
nonsense was not stupidity, and that not one verse
in all that delightful bundle missed its own special
meaning and purpose.
We do not propose to find the key to this remark-
able work-for two reasons: first, because there are
different keys for different minds; and second, be-
cause the unexplainable things in many cases come
nearer the “mind's eye,” as Shakespeare calls it,
without words. We cannot tell why we under-
stand such and such a thing, but we do understand
it, and that is enough-quite according to Lewis
Carroll's ideas, for he always appeals to our imagin-
ation and that is never guided by rules. The higher
it soars, the more fantastic the region over which it
hovers, the nearer it gets to the land of “ make be-
lieve,” “ let's pretend ” and “supposing," the better
pleased is Lewis Carroll. In a delightful letter to
some American children, published in The Critic
shortly after his death, he gives his own ideas as to
the meaning of the Snark.
“ I'm very much afraid I didn't mean anything
13

184
but nonsense,” he wrote; “still you know words
mean more than we mean to express when we use
them, so a whole book ought to mean a great deal
more than the writer means. So whatever good
meanings are in the book, I shall be glad to accept
as the meaning of the book. The best that I've
seen is by a lady (she published it in a letter
to a newspaper) that the whole book is an allegory
on the search after happiness. I think this fits beau-
tifully in many ways, particularly about the bathing
machines; when people get weary of life, and can't
find happiness in towns or in books, then they rush
off to the seaside to see what bathing machines will
do for them.”
Taking this idea for the foundation of the poem,
it is easy to explain Fit the First, better named The
Landing, though where they landed it is almost im-
possible to say.
“ Just the place for a Snark,” the Bellman cried,
and, as he stated this fact three distinct times, it was
undoubtedly true. That was the Bellman's rule-
once was uncertain, twice was possible, three times
was “ dead sure." And the Bellman being a per-
son of some authority, ought to have known. The
crew consisted of a Boots, a Maker of Bonnets and
Hoods, a Barrister, a Broker, a Billiard-marker, a
Banker, a Beaver, a Butcher, and a nameless being
who passed for the Baker, and who, in the end,
turned out to be the luckless victim of the Snark.
He is thus beautifully described :

185
.
“There was one who was famed for a number of things
He forgot when he entered the ship:
His umbrella,.his watch, all his jewels and rings,
And the clothes he had brought for the trip.
“He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed,
With his name painted clearly on each:
But, since he omitted to mention the fact,
They were all left behind on the beach.
ause
“The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because
He had seven coats on when he came,
With three pair of boots—but the worst of it was,
He had wholly forgotten his name.
“He would answer to ‘Hi!' or to any loud cry,
Such as ‘Fry me!' or 'Fritter my wig!'.
To •What-you-may-call-um!' or 'What-was-his-
name!
But especially 'Thing-um-a-jig!'
“ While, for those who preferred a more forcible word,
He had different names from these:
His intimate friends called him 'Candle-ends,'
And his enemies ‘Toasted-cheese.'
“His form is ungainly, his intellect small'
(So the Bellman would often remark);
‘But his courage is perfect! and that, after all,
Is the thing that one needs with a Snark.'
“He would joke with hyenas, returning their stare
With an impudent wag of the head:
And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw with a bear,
Just to keep up its spirits,' he said.

186
“He came as a Baker: but owned when too late-
And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad-
He could only bake Bride-cake, for which I may state,
No materials were to be had.”
Notice how ingeniously the actors in this drama
are introduced; all the “B's," as it were, buzzing
after the phantom of happiness, which eludes them,
no matter how hard they struggle to find it.
Notice, too, that all these beings are unmarried, a
fact shown by the Baker not being able to make a
bride-cake as there are no materials on hand. All
these creatures, while hunting for happiness, came
to prey upon each other. The Butcher only killed
Beavers, the Barrister was hunting among his fel-
low sailors for a good legal case. The Banker took
charge of all their cash, for it certainly takes money
to hunt properly for a Snark, and it is a well-known
fact that bankers need all the money they can get.
Fit the Second describes the Bellman and why he
had such influence with his crew :
The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies:
Such a carriage, such ease, and such grace !
Such solemnity, too! One could see he was wise,
The moment one looked in his face!
He had bought a large map representing the sea,
Without the least vestige of land:
And the crew were much pleased when they found
it to be
A map they could all understand.

187
“What's the good of Mercator's North Poles and
Equators,
Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines ?”.
So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply,
“ They are merely conventional signs!”
.
“Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and
capes !
But we've got our brave Captain to thank”.
(So the crew would protest), “ that he's bought us the
best-
A perfect and absolute blank !”
And true enough, the Bellman's idea of the ocean
was a big square basin, with the latitude and longi-
tude carefully written out on the margin. They
found, however, that their “ brave Captain” knew
very little about navigation, he-
“Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
And that was to tingle his bell.”
He thought nothing of telling his crew to steer
starboard and larboard at the same time, and then
we know how
The bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes.
"A thing," as the Bellman remarked,
“That frequently happens in tropical climes,
When a vessel is, so to speak, 'snarked.'”
The Bellman had hoped, when the wind blew
toward the east, that the ship would not travel

188
toward the west, but it seems that with all his nau-
tical knowledge he could not prevent it; ships are
perverse animals!
“ But the danger was past—they had landed at last,
With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags:
Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the
view,
Which consisted of chasms and crags.”
Now that they had reached the land of the Snark,
the Bellman proceeded to air his knowledge on that
subject.
“A snark," he said, “had five unmistakable
traits—its taste, ‘meager and mellow and crisp,'
its habit of getting up late, its slowness in taking a
jest, its fondness for bathing machines, and, fifth
and lastly, its ambition.” He further informed the
crew that “the snarks that had feathers could bite,
and those that had whiskers could scratch,” adding
as an afterthought:
“For although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
Yet I feel it my duty to say,
Some are Boojums—' The Bellman broke off in alarm,
For the Baker had fainted away."
Fit the Third was the Baker's tale.
“They roused him with muffins, they roused him with ice,
They roused him with mustard and cress,
They roused him with jam and judicious advice,
They set him conundrums to guess.”

189
Then he explained why it was that the name
“Boojum” made him faint. It seems that a dear
uncle, after whom he was named, gave him some
wholesome advice about the way to hunt a snark,
and this uncle seemed to be a man of much influence:
“' You may seek it with thimbles, and seek it with care;
You may hunt it with forks and hope;
You may threaten its life with a railway-share;
You may charm it with smiles and soap- '"
“ 'That's exactly the method,' the Bellman bold
In a hasty parenthesis cried,
That's exactly the way I have always been told
That the capture of Snarks should be tried !"
“But, oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day,
If your Snark be a Boojum! For then
You will softly and suddenly vanish away,
And never be met with again!'".
This of course was a very sad thing to think of,
for the man with no name, who was named after his
uncle, and called in courtesy the Baker, had grown
to be a great favorite with the crew; but they had
no time to waste in sentiment—they were in the
Snark's own land, they had the Bellman's orders in
Fit the Fourth—the Hunting:
“To seek it with thimbles, to seek it with care;
To pursue it with forks and hope;
To threaten its life with a railway share;
To charm it with smiles and soap!

190
“For the Snark's a peculiar creature, that won't
Be caught in a commonplace way.
Do all that you know, and try all that you don't:
Not a chance must be wasted to-day!”
Then they all went to work according to their
own special way, just as we would do now in our
hunt for happiness through the chasms and crags of
every day.
Fit the Fifth is the Beaver's Lesson, when the
Butcher discourses wisely on arithmetic and natu-
ral history, two subjects a butcher should know
pretty thoroughly, and this is proved :
“While the Beaver confessed, with affectionate looks
More eloquent even than tears,
It had learned in ten minutes far more than all books
Would have taught it in seventy years."
The Barrister's Dream occupied Fit the Sixth,
and here our poet's keen wit gave many a slap at the
law and the lawyers.
The Banker's Fate in Fit the Seventh was sad
enough; he was grabbed by the Bandersnatch (that
“ frumious”! “ portmanteau ” creature that we met
before in the Lay of the Jabberwocky) and worried
and tossed about until he completely lost his senses.
Some bankers are that way in the pursuit of fortune,
which means happiness to them; but fortune may
turn, like the Bandersnatch, and shake their minds
out of their bodies, and so they left this Banker to

191
his fate. That is the way of people when bankers
are in trouble, because they were reckless and not
always careful to
“ Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
The frumious Bandersnatch.”
Fit the Eighth treats of the vanishing of the
Baker according to the prediction of his prophetic
uncle. All day long the eager searchers had hunted
in vain, but just at the close of the day they heard a
shout in the distance and beheld their Baker “ erect
and sublime” on top of a crag, waving his arms and
shouting wildly; then before their startled and hor-
rified gaze, he plunged into a chasm and disappeared
forever.
.
“It's a Snark !' was the sound that first came to their
ears,
And seemed almost too good to be true.
Then followed a torrent of laughter and cheers,
Then the ominous words, “It's a Boo '
“Then, silence. Some fancied they heard in the air
A weary and wandering sigh
That sounded like ‘jum!' but the others declare
It was only a breeze that went by.
“ They hunted till darkness came on, but they found
Not a button, or feather, or mark
By which they could tell that they stood on the
ground
Where the Baker had met with the Snark.

192
“In the midst of the word he was trying to say,
In the midst of his laughter and glee,
. He had softly and suddenly vanished away-
For the Snark was a Boojum, you see.”
What became of the Bellman and his crew is left
to our imagination. Perhaps the Baker's fate was
a warning, or perhaps they are still hunting—not
too close to the chasm. Lewis Carroll, always so
particular about proper endings, refuses any expla-
nation. The fact that this special Snark was a
“Boojum” altered all the rules of the hunt. No
body knows what it is, but all the same nobody
wishes to meet a “Boojum.” That's all there is
about it.
“Now how absurd to talk such nonsense!” some
learned school girl may exclaim; undoubtedly one
who has high ideals about life and literature. But
is it nonsense we are talking, and does the quaint
poem really teach us nothing? Anything which
brings a picture to the mind must surely have some
merit, and there is much homely common sense
wrapped up in the queer verses if we have but the
wit to find it, and no one is too young nor too old
to join in this hunt for happiness.
Read the poem over and over, put expression and
feeling into it, treat the Bellman and his strange
crew as if they were real human beings—there's a
lot of the human in them after all—and see if new
ideas and new meanings do not pop into your head
with each reading, while the verses, all uncon-

193
sciously, will stick in your memory, where Tenny-
son or Wordsworth or even Shakespeare fails to
hold a place there.
Of course, Lewis Carroll's own especial girl-
friends understood " The Hunting of the Snark”
better than the less favored “outsiders.” First of
all there was Lewis Carroll himself to read it to
them in his own expressive way, his pleasant voice
sinking impressively at exciting moments, and his
clear explanation of each “portmanteau ” word
helping along wonderfully. We can fancy the
gleam of fun in the blue eyes, the sweep of his hand
across his hair, the sudden sweet smile with which
he pointed his jests or clothed his moral, as the case
might be. Indeed, one little girl was so fascinated
with the poem which he sent her as a gift that she
learned the whole of it by heart, and insisted on re-
peating it during a long country drive.
“The Hunting of the Snark” created quite a
sensation among his friends. The first edition was
finely illustrated by Henry Holiday, whose clever
drawings show how well he understood the poem,
and what sympathy existed between himself and the
author.
“ Phantasmagoria,” his ghost poem, deals with
the friendly relations always existing between
ghosts and the people they are supposed to haunt;
a whimsical idea, carried out in Lewis Carroll's
whimsical way, with lots of fun and a good deal of
simple philosophy worked out in the verses. One

194
canto is particularly amusing. Here are some of
the verses:
Oh, when I was a little Ghost,
A merry time had we!
Each seated on his favorite post,
We chumped and chawed the buttered toast
They gave us for our tea.
“That story is in print! ” I cried.
“ Don't say it's not, because
It's known as well as Bradshaw's Guide!”
(The Ghost uneasily replied
He hardly thought it was.)
It's not in Nursery Rhymes? And yet
I almost think it is—
“ Three little Ghostesses ” were set
“On postesses,” you know, and ate
Their “buttered toastesses.”
“ The Three Voices,” his next ambitious poem, is
rather out of the realm of childhood. A weak-
minded man and a strong-minded lady met on the
seashore, she having rescued his hat from the antics
of a playful breeze by pinning it down on the sands
with her umbrella, right through the center of the
soft crown. When she handed it to him in its bat-
tered state, he was scarcely as grateful as he might
have been—he was rude, in fact,
For it had lost its shape and shine,
And it had cost him four-and-nine,
And he was going out to dine.

195
“To dine !” she sneered in acid tone.
“To bend thy being to a bone
Clothed in a radiance not its own!”
“Term it not ‘radiance,'” said he:
“ 'Tis solid nutriment to me. ,
Dinner is Dinner: Tea is Tea."
And she “ Yea so? Yet wherefore cease?
Let thy scant knowledge find increase.
Say . Men are Men, and Geese are Geese.'”
The gentleman wanted to get away from this
severe lady, but he could see no escape, for she was
getting excited.
“To dine!” she shrieked, in dragon-wrath.
“To swallow wines all foam and froth!
To simper at a tablecloth !
“ Canst thou desire or pie or puff?
Thy well-bred manners were enough,
Without such gross material stuff.”
“Yet well-bred men,” he faintly said,
“Are not unwilling to be fed:
Nor are they well without the bread."
Her visage scorched him ere she spoke;
“ There are," she said, "a kind of folk
Who have no horror of a joke.
“Such wretches live: they take their share
Of common earth and common air:
We come across them here and there."

196
“ We grant them—there is no escape-
A sort of semihuman shape
Suggestive of the manlike Ape."
So the arguing went on–her Voice, his Voice,
and the Voice of the Sea. He tried to joke away
her solemn mood with a pun.
“The world is but a Thought,” said he:
“ The vast, unfathomable sea
Is but a Notion-unto me.”
And darkly fell her answer dread
Upon his unresisting head,
Like half a hundredweight of lead.
“The Good and Great must ever shun
That reckless and abandoned one
Who stoops to perpetrate a pun.
“The man that smokes—that reads the Times
That goes to Christmas Pantomimes-
Is capable of any crimes ! ”
Anyone can understand these verses, but it is very
plain that the poem is a satire on the rise of the
learned lady, who takes no interest in the lighter,
pleasanter side of life; a being much detested by
Lewis Carroll, who above all things loved a “wom-
anly woman.” As he grew older he became some-
what precise and old-fashioned in his opinions-
that is perhaps the reason why he was so lovable.
His ideals of womanhood and little girlhood were

197
fixed and beautiful dreams, untouched by the rush
of the times. The “new woman” puzzled and
pained him quite as much as the pert, precocious, up-
to-date girl. Would there were more Lewis Car-
rolls in the world; quiet, simple, old-fashioned,
courteous gentlemen with ideals!
Here is a clever little poem dedicated to girls,
which he calls
A GAME OF FIVES.
Five little girls, of five, four, three, two, one:
Rolling on the heartrug, full of tricks and fun.
Five rosy girls, in years from ten to six:
Sitting down to lessons-no more time for tricks.
Five growing girls, from fifteen to eleven:
Music, drawing, languages, and food enough for seven!
Five winsome girls, from twenty to sixteen:
Each young man that calls I say, “ Now tell me which
you mean!”
Five dashing girls, the youngest twenty-one:
But if nobody proposes, what is there to be done?
Five showy girls—but thirty is an age
When girls may be engaging, but they somehow don't
engage.
Five dressy girls, of thirty-one or more:
So gracious to the shy young men they snubbed so
much before!

198
Five passé girls. Their age? Well, never mind !
We jog along together, like the rest of human kind:
But the quondam “careless bachelor” begins to think
he knows
The answer to that ancient problem "how the money
goes !”
There was no theme, in short, that Lewis Carroll
did not fit into a rhyme or a poem. Some of them
were full of real feeling, others were sparkling with
nonsense, but all had their charm. No style nor
meter daunted him; no poet was too great for his
clever pen to parody; no ode was too heroic for a
little earthly fun; and when the measure was rollick-
ing the rhymer was at his best. Of this last, Alice's
invitation to the Looking-Glass world is a fair
example:
To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,
“ I've a scepter in hand, I've a crown on my head.
Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,
Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen,
and me!”
Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,
And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran;
Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea,
And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three !
“O Looking-Glass creatures," quoth Alice, “ draw near!
Tis an honor to see me, a favor to hear;
'Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!”

199
Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,
Or anything else that is pleasant to drink;
Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine,
And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!”
The real sentiment always cropped out in his
verses to little girls; from youth to age he was their
“good knight and true" and all his fairest thoughts
were kept for them. Many a grown woman has
carefully hoarded among her treasures some bit of
verse from Lewis Carroll, which her happy child-
hood inspired him to write; but the dedication of
“ Alice through the Looking-Glass ” was to the un-
known child, whom his book went forth to please:
Child of the pure, unclouded brow
And dreaming eyes of wonder!
Though time be fleet, and I and thou
Are half a life asunder,
Thy loving smile will surely hail
The love-gift of a fairy tale.
I have not seen thy sunny face,
Nor heard thy silver laughter:
No thought of me shall find a place
In thy young life's hereafter,
Enough that now thou wilt not fail
To listen to my fairy tale.
A tale begun in other days,
When summer suns were glowing,
A simple chime, that served to time
The rhythm of our rowing,
Whose echoes live in memory yet,
Though envious years would say “forget.”
14

200
Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread,
With bitter tidings laden,
Shall summon to unwelcome bed
A melancholy maiden!
We are but older children, dear,
Who fret to find our bedtime near.
Without, the frost, the blinding snow,
The storm-wind's moody madness;
Within, the firelight's ruddy glow,
And childhood's nest of gladness.
The magic words shall hold thee fast;
Thou shalt not heed the raving blast.
And though the shadow of a sigh
May tremble through the story,
For “happy summer days " gone by
And vanished summer glory,
It shall not touch, with breath of bale,
The pleasance of our fairy tale.
These are only a meager handful of his many
poems. Through his life this gift stayed with him,
with all its early spirit and freshness; the added
years but added grace and lightness to his touch, for
in the “ Story of Sylvie and Bruno” there are
some gems: but that is another chapter and we shall
hear them later.
And so the years passed, and the writer of the
“ Alices” and the “ Jabberwocky” and “The
Hunting of the Snark” and other poems fastened
himself slowly but surely into the loyal hearts of his
many readers, and the grave mathematical lecturer

201
of Christ Church seemed just a trifle older and
graver than of yore. He was very reserved, very
shy, and kept somewhat aloof from his fellow
“dons "; but let a little girl tap ever so faintly at his
study door, the knock was heard, the door flung ·
wide, Charles Lutwidge Dodgson vanished into
some inner sanctum, and Lewis Carroll stood
smiling on the threshold to welcome her with open
arms.

CHAPTER XI.
1EWIS CARROLL had a mind which
never rested in waking hours, and as is
the case with all such active thinkers,
his hours of sleeping were often broken
by long stretches of wakefulness, during which
time the thinking machinery set itself in motion and
spun out problems and riddles and odd games and
puzzles.
“ Puzzles and problems of all sorts were a delight
to Mr. Dodgson,” writes Miss Beatrice Hatch in
the Strand Magazine. “Many a sleepless night
was occupied by what he called a 'pillow problem’;
in fact his mathematical mind seemed always at
work on something of the kind, and he loved to dis-
cuss and argue a point connected with his logic, if
he could but find a willing listener. Sometimes,
while paying an afternoon call, he would borrow
scraps of paper and leave neat little diagrams or
word puzzles to be worked out by his friends."
Logic was a study of which he was very fond.
After he gave up in 1881 the lectureship of mathe-
202

203
matics which he had held for twenty-five years he
determined to make literature a profession; to de-
vote part of his time to more serious study, and a
fair portion to the equally fascinating work for
children.
“In his estimation,” says Miss Hatch, “ logic
was a most important study for every one; no pains
were spared to make it clear and interesting to those
who would consent to learn of him, either in a class
that he begged to be allowed to hold in a school or
college, or to a single individual girl who showed
the smallest inclination to profit by his instructions."
He took the greatest delight in his subject and
wisely argued that all girls should learn, not only
to reason, but to reason properly—that is, log-
ically. With this end in view he wrote for their
use a little book which he called “ The Game of
Logic," and the girls, whose footsteps he had
guided in childish days through realms of nonsense,
were willing in many instances to journey with him
into the byways of learning, feeling sure he would
not lead them into depths where they could not fol-
low. The little volume contains four chapters, and
the whimsical headings show us at once that Lewis
Carroll was the author, and not Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson.
Chapter I........New Lamps for Old.
Chapter II.......Cross Questions.
Chapter III...... Crooked Answers.
Chapter IV ...... Hit or Miss.

204
To be sure this is not a “play” book, and even
as a “game” it is one which requires a great deal of
systematic thinking and reasoning. The girl who
has reached thinking and reasoning years and does
not care to do either, had better not even peep into
the book; but if she is built on sturdier lines and
wishes to peep, she must do more—she must read
it step by step and study the carefully drawn dia-
grams, if she would follow intelligently the clear,
precise arguments. The book is dedicated-
· TO MY CHILD-FRIEND.
I charm in vain: for never again,
All keenly as my glance I bend,
Will memory, goddess coy,
Embody for my joy
Departed days, nor let me gaze
On thee, my Fairy Friend !
Yet could thy face, in mystic grace,
A moment smile on me, 'twould send
Far-darting rays of light
From Heaven athwart the night,
By which to read in very deed
Thy spirit, sweetest Friend !
So may the stream of Life's long dream
Flow gently onward to its end,
With many a floweret gay,
Adown its billowy way:
May no sigh vex nor care perplex
My loving little Friend!

205
His preface is most enticing. He says: “This
Game requires nine Counters—four of one color
and five of another; say four red and five gray.
Besides the nine Counters, it also requires one
Player at least. I am not aware of any game that
can be played with less than this number; while
there are several that require more; take Cricket,
for instance, which requires twenty-two. How
much easier it is, when you want to play a game, to
find one Player than twenty-two! At the same
time, though one Player is enough, a good deal
more amusement may be got by two working at it
together, and correcting each other's mistakes.
:." A second advantage possessed by this Game is
that, besides being an endless source of amusement
(the number of arguments that may be worked by
it being infinite), it will give the Players a little in-
struction as well. But is there any great harm in
that, so long as you get plenty of amusement ? ”
To explain the book thoroughly would take the
wit and clever handling of Lewis Carroll himself,
but to the beginner of Logic a few of these un-
finished syllogisms may prove interesting: a syl-
logism in logical language consists of what is
known as two Premisses and one Conclusion, and is
a very simple form of argument when you get used
to it.
For instance, supposing someone says: “All my
friends have colds”; someone else may add: “No
one can sing who has a cold"; then the third

206
person draws the conclusion, which is: “None of
my friends can sing,” and the perfect logical argu-
ment would read as follows:
1. Premise—“All my friends have colds."
2. Premise—“No one can sing who has a cold."
3. Conclusion—“None of my friends can sing.”
That is what is called a perfect syllogism, and in
Chapter IV, which he calls Hit or Miss, Lewis Car-
roll has collected a hundred examples containing the
two Premisses which need the Conclusion. Here
are some of them. Anyone can draw her own con-
clusions :
Pain is wearisome;
No pain is eagerly wished for.
In each case the student is required to fill up the
third space.
No bald person needs a hairbrush;
No lizards have hair.
No unhappy people chuckle;
No happy people groan.
All ducks waddle;
Nothing that waddles is graceful.
Some oysters are silent;
No silent creatures are amusing.
Umbrellas are useful on a journey;
What is useless on a journey should be left behind.

207
No quadrupeds can whistle;
Some cats are quadrupeds.
Some bald people wear wigs;
All your children have hair.
The whole book is brimful of humor and simple
everyday reasoning that the smallest child could
understand.
Another “puzzle” book of even an earlier date
is “A Tangled Tale "; this is dedicated
TO MY PUPIL.
Belovéd pupil! Tamed by thee,
Addish, Subtrac-, Multiplica-tion,
Division, Fractions, Rule of Three,
Attest the deft manipulation !
Then onward! Let the voice of Fame,
From Age to Age repeat the story,
Till thou hast won thyself a name,
Exceeding even Euclid's glory!
In the preface he says: “This Tale originally
appeared as a serial in The Monthly Packet, begin-
ning in April, 1880. The writer's intention was to
embody in each Knot (like the medicine so deftly
but ineffectually concealed in the jam of our child-
hood) one or more mathematical questions, in
Arithmetic, Algebra, or Geometry, as the case
might be, for the amusement and possible edifica-
tion of the fair readers of that Magazine.
“October, 1885.
L. C.”

208
These are regular mathematical problems and
“posers," most of them, and it seems that the
readers, being more or less ambitious, set to work in
right good earnest to answer them, and sent in the
solutions to the author under assumed names, and
then he produced the real problem, the real answer,
and all the best answers of the contestants. These
problems were all called Knots and were told in the
form of stories.
Knot I was called Excelsior. It was written as
a tale of adventure, and ran as follows:
“The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading
into the somber shadows of night, when two travel-
ers might have been observed swiftly—at a pace of
six miles in the hour-descending the rugged side
of a mountain; the younger bounding from crag to
crag with the agility of a fawn, while his com-
panion, whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease in the
heavy chain armor habitually worn by tourists in
that district, toiled on painfully at his side.”
Lewis Carroll is evidently imitating the style of
some celebrated writer-Henry James, most likely,
who is rather fond of opening his story with
“two travelers," or perhaps Sir Walter Scott. He
goes on:
“As is always the case under such circumstances,
the younger knight was the first to break the silence.
““A goodly pace, I trow!'he exclaimed. “We
sped not thus in the ascent!'
“Goodly, indeed!' the other echoed with a

209
groan. “We clomb it but at three miles in the
hour.'
“ And on the dead level our pace is—?' the
younger suggested; for he was weak in statistics,
and left all such details to his aged companion.
“Four miles in the hour,' the other wearily re-
plied. 'Not an ounce more,' he added, with that
love of metaphor so common in old age, and not a
farthing less!'
"«'Twas three hours past high noon when we
left our hostelry,' the young man said, musingly.
‘We shall scarce be back by supper-time. Per-
chance mine host will roundly deny us all food!'
"He will chide our tardy return,' was the grave
reply, and such a rebuke will be meet.'
" A brave conceit!' cried the other, with a
merry laugh. ‘And should we bid him bring us
yet another course, I trow his answer will be
tart!'
“We shall but get our deserts,' sighed the older
knight, who had never seen a joke in his life, and
was somewhat displeased at his companion's un-
timely levity. ''Twill be nine of the clock,' he
added in an undertone, 'by the time we regain our
hostelry. Full many a mile have we plodded this
day!'
“How many? How many?' cried the eager
youth, ever athirst for knowledge.
“ The old man was silent.
“'Tell me,' he answered after a moment's

210
thought, 'what time it was when we stood together
on yonder peak. Not exact to the minute!'he
added, hastily, reading a protest in the young man's
face. 'An' thy guess be within one poor half hour
of the mark, 'tis all I ask of thy mother's son! Then
will I tell thee, true to the last inch, how far we shall
have trudged betwixt three and nine of the clock.'
“A groan was the young man's only reply, while
his convulsed features and the deep wrinkles that
chased each other across his manly brow revealed
the abyss of arithmetical agony into which one
chance question had plunged him.”
The problem in plain English is this: “Two
travelers spend from three o'clock till nine in
walking along a level road, up a hill, and home
again, their pace on the level being four miles an
hour, up hill three, and down hill six. Find dis-
tance walked : also (within half an hour) the time
of reaching top of hill."
Answer. “Twenty-four miles: half-past six.”
The explanation is very clear and very simple,
but we will not give it here. This first knot of “ A
Tangled Tale" offers attractions of its own, for
like the dream Alice someone may exclaim, “A
Knot! Oh, do let me help to undo it!”
The second problem or “ Tale" is called Eligible
Apartments, and deals with the adventures of one
Balbus and his pupils, and contains two “Knots."
One is: “ The Governor of — wants to give
a very small dinner party, and he means to ask his

211
father's brother-in-law, his brother's father-in-law,
and his brother-in-law's father, and we're to guess
how many guests there will be.” The answer is
one. Perhaps some ambitious person will go over
the ground and prove it. The second knot deals
with the Eligible Apartments which Balbus and his
pupils were hunting. At the end of their walk they
found themselves in a square.
“ It is a Square!' was Balbus's first cry of de-
light as he gazed around him. “Beautiful! Beau-
ti-ful! And rectangular!' and as he plunged into
Geometry he also plunged into funny conversations
with the average English landlady, which we can
better follow :
" Which there is one room, gentlemen,' said the
smiling landlady,' and a sweet room, too. As snug
a little back room-
“We will see it,' said Balbus gloomily as they
followed her in. 'I knew how it would be! One
room in each house! No view I suppose.'
“Which indeed there is, gentlemen!' the land-
lady indignantly protested as she drew up the blind,
and indicated the back garden.
"Cabbages, I perceive,' said Balbus. 'Well,
they're green at any rate.
“Which the greens at the shops,' their hostess
explained, are by no means dependable upon.
Here you has them on the premises, and of the
best.'
“Does the window open?' was always Balbus's

212
first question in testing a lodging; and 'Does the
chimney smoke?' his second. Satisfied on all
points, he secured the refusal of the room, and
moved on to the next house where they repeated the
same performance, adding as an afterthought:
‘Does the cat scratch?'
“The landlady looked around suspiciously as if
to make sure the cat was not listening. 'I will not
deceive you, gentlemen,' she said, “it do scratch, but
not without you pulls its whiskers. It'll never do
it, she repeated slowly, with a visible effort to re-
call the exact words between herself and the cat,
. without you pulls its whiskers!'
“Much may be excused in a cat so treated,' said
Balbus as they left the house, ... leaving the
landlady curtseying on the doorstep and still mur-
muring to herself her parting words, as if they were
a form of blessing, 'not without you pulls its
whiskers!'”
He has given us a real Dickens atmosphere in the
dialogue, but the medicinal problem tucked into it
all is too much like hard work.
There were ten of these “Knots,” each one
harder than its predecessor, and Lewis Carroll
found much interest in receiving and criticising
the answers, all sent under fictitious names.
This clever mathematician delighted in “puz-
zlers," and sometimes he found a kindred soul
among the guessers, which always pleased him.
One of his favorite problems was one that as

213
early as the days of the Rectory Umbrella he
brought before his limited public. He called it
Difficulty No. 1.
“Where in its passage round the earth does the
day change its name?”
This question pursued him all through his math-
ematical career, and the difficulty of answering it
has never lessened. Even in “A Tangled Tale”
neither Balbus nor his ambitious young pupils could
do much with the problem.
Difficulty No. 2 is very humorous, and somewhat
of a “catch " question.
“Which is the best—a clock that is right only
once a year, or a clock that is right twice every
day?"
In March, 1897, Vanity Fair, a current English
magazine, had the following article entitled :
"A New Puzzle."
“The readers of Vanity Fair have, during the
last ten years, shown so much interest in Acrostics
and Hard Cases, which were at first made the object
of sustained competition for prizes in the journal,
that it has been sought to invent for them an en-
tirely new kind of Puzzle, such as would interest
them equally with those that have already been so
successful. The subjoined letter from Mr. Lewis
Carroll will explain itself, and will introduce a Puz-
zle so entirely novel and withal so interesting that

214
the transmutation (changing] of the original into
the final word of the Doublets may be expected to
become an occupation, to the full as amusing as
the guessing of the Double Acrostics has already
proved.”
“Dear Vanity,” Lewis Carroll writes :-“ Just
a year ago last Christmas two young ladies, smart-
ing under that sorest scourge of feminine humanity,
the having "nothing to do,” besought me to send
them “some riddles.” But riddles I had none at
hand and therefore set myself to devise some other
form of verbal torture which should serve the same
purpose. The result of my meditations was a new
kind of Puzzle, new at least to me, which now that
it has been fairly tested by a year's experience, and
commended by many friends, I offer to you as a
newly gathered nut to be cracked by the omnivo-
rous teeth that have already masticated so many of
your Double Acrostics.
“ The rules of the Puzzle are simple enough.
Two words are proposed, of the same length; and
the Puzzle consists in linking these together by in-
terposing other words, each of which shall differ
from the next word in one letter only. That is to
say, one letter may be changed in one of the given
words, then one letter in the word so obtained, and
so on, till we arrive at the other given word. The
letters must not be interchanged among themselves,
but each must keep to its own place. As an ex-
ample, the word 'head' may be changed into ‘tail'
.

215
by interposing the words 'heal, teal, tell, tall.' I
call the two given words ‘ a Doublet,' the interposed
words 'Links,' and the entire series 'a Chain,' of
which I here append an example:
Head
heal
teal
tell
tall
Tail
“It is perhaps needless to state that the links
should be English words, such as might be used in
good society.
“The easiest ‘Doublets' are those in which the
consonants in one word answer to the consonants
in the other, and the vowels to vowels; 'head' and
' tail' constitute a Doublet of this kind. Where this
is not the case, as in 'head' and 'hare,' the first
thing to be done is to transform one member of the
Doublet into a word whose consonants and vowels
shall answer to those in the other member ('head,
herd, here'), after which there is seldom much dif-
ficulty in completing the 'Chain.' ...
“ LEWIS CARROLL.”
“ Doublets” was brought out in book form in
1880, and proved a very attractive little volume.
“ The Game of Logic” and “A Tangled Tale”
are also in book form, the latter cleverly illustrated
by Arthur B. Frost.
15

216
It would take too long to name all the games and
puzzles Lewis Carroll invented. Some were' care-
fully thought out, some were produced on the spur
of the moment, generally for the amusement of
some special child friend. Indeed, the puzzles and
riddles and games had accumulated to such an ex-
tent that he was arranging to publish a book of
them with illustrations by Miss E. Gertrude Thom-
son, but after his death the plans fell through, and
many literary projects were abandoned. .
Acrostic writing was one of his favorite pastimes,
and he wrote enough of these to have filled a good
fat little volume.
His Wonderland Stamp-Case, one of his own in-
genious inventions, might come under the head of
“ Puzzles and Problems,” and, oddly enough, an
interesting description of this stamp-case was pub-
lished only a short time ago in The Nation. The
writer describes his own copy which he bought
when it was new, some twenty years ago. There
is first an envelope of red paper, on which is
printed :
The “Wonderland ” Postage Stamp-Case,
Invented by Louis Carroll, Oct. 29, 1888.
This case contains 12 separate packets for
Stamps of different values, and 2 Coloured
Pictorial Surprises, taken from "Alice in
Wonderland.” It is accompanied with 8 or
9 Wise Words about Letter-Writing.
ist, post-free, 13d.

217
On the flap of the envelope is:
Published by Emberlin & Son,
4 Magdalen Street, Oxford.
“ The Stamp-Case," the writer tells us, “consists
of a stiff paper folded with the pockets on the inner
leaves and a picture on each outer leaf. This Case
is inclosed in a sliding cover, and in this way the
pictorial surprise becomes possible. A picture of
Alice holding the Baby is on the front cover, and
when this is drawn off, there is underneath a picture
of Alice nursing a pig. On the back cover is the
famous Cat, which vanishes to a shadowy grin on
the pictures beneath.”
The booklet which accompanied this little stamp-
case found its way to many of his girl friends.
Now, whether they bought it, or whether, under
guise of giving a present, this clever friend of theirs
sent them the stamp-case with the “eight or nine
words of advice” slyly tucked in, we cannot say,
but in the case of Isa Bowman and of Beatrice
Hatch the booklet evidently made a deep impres-
sion, for both quote from it very freely, and some
of the “wise words” are certainly worth heeding,
for instance:
“Address and stamp the envelope."
“What! Before writing the letter?”
“Most certainly; and I'll tell you what will happen if
you don't. You will go on writing till the last moment,
and just in the middle of the last sentence you will be-

218
come aware that 'time's up!' Then comes the hurried
wind-up—the wildly scrawled signature—the hastily
fastened envelope which comes open in the post-the
address—a mere hieroglyphic—the horrible discovery
that you've forgotten to replenish your stamp-case—the
frantic appeal to everyone in the house to lend you a
stamp—the headlong rush to the Post Office, arriving hot
and gasping, just after the box has been closed—and
finally, a week afterwards, the return of the letter from
the dead letter office, marked, 'address illegible.'”
“Write legibly.
“The average temper of the human race would be
perceptibly sweetened if everybody obeyed this rule. A
great deal of bad writing in the world comes simply
from writing too quickly. Of course you reply, 'I do it
to save time. A very good object no doubt; but what
right have you to do it at your friend's expense? Isn't
his time as valuable as yours? Years ago I used to
receive letters from a friend-and very interesting letters
too-written in one of the most atrocious hands ever
invented. It generally took me about a week to read
one of his letters! I used to carry it about in my pocket
and take it out at leisure times to puzzle over the riddles
which composed it-holding it in different positions, till
at last the meaning of some hopeless scrawl would flash
upon me, when I at once wrote down the English under
it; and when several had thus been guessed, the context
would help me with the others till at last the whole series
of hieroglyphics was deciphered. If all one's friends
wrote like that, life would be entirely spent in reading
their letters !"
"My Ninth Rule.-When you get to the end of a note-
sheet, and find you have more to say, take another piece

219
of paper—a whole sheet or a scrap, as the case may
demand, but whatever you do, don't cross! Remember the
old proverb 'Cross-writing makes cross-reading.' 'The old
proverb?' you say inquiringly. 'How old?' Why, not so
very ancient, I must confess. In fact, I'm afraid I
invented it while writing this paragraph. Still, you know
'old' is a comparative term; I think you would be quite
justified in addressing a chicken just out of the shell as
‘Old Boy!' when compared with another chicken that
was only half out!”
"Don't try to have the last word,” he tells us—and
again, “ Don't fill more than a page and a half with apol-
ogies for not having written sooner.”
“On how to end a letter," he advises the writer to “re-
fer to your correspondent's last letter, and make your
winding up at least as friendly as his; in fact, even if a
shade more friendly, it will do no harm.”
"When you take your letters to the post, carry them in
your hand. If you put them in your pocket, you will take
a long country walk (I speak from experience), passing
the post office twice, going and returning, and when you
get home you will find them still in your pocket.”
Letter-writing was as much a part of Lewis Car-
roll as games, and puzzles, and problems, and math-
ematics, and nonsense, and little girls. Indeed,
as we view him through the stretch of years, we
find him so many-sided that he himself would have
done well to draw a new geometrical figure to rep-
resent a nature so full of strange angles and sur-
prising shapes. If one is fond of looking into a

220
.
kaleidoscope, and watching the ever-changing facets
and colors and designs, one would be pretty apt to
understand the constant shifting of that active mind,
always on the alert for new ideas, but steady and
fixed in many good old ones, which had become
firm habits.
He was fond of giving his child-friends “nuts
to crack," and nothing pleased him more than to be
the center of some group of little girls, firing his
conundrums and puzzles into their minds, and
watching the bright young faces catching the glow
of his thoughts. He knew just how far to go, and
when to turn some dawning idea into quaint non-
sense, so that the young mind could grasp and hold
it. Dear maker of nonsense, dear teacher and
friend, dear lover of children, can they ever forget
you!

CHAPTER XII.
N a little poem called “A Sea Dirge,”
which Lewis Carroll wrote about this
time, we find some very strange, uncom-
plimentary remarks, considering the fact
that most of his vacations was spent at the seashore.
Eastbourne, in the summer time, was as much his
home-during the last fifteen years of his life—as
Christ Church during the Oxford term. His pretty
house in a shady, quiet street was a familiar spot to
every girl friend of his acquaintance, and many of
his closest and most interesting friendships were be-
gun by the sea, yet he says:
There are certain things, as a spider, a ghost,
The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three-
That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most
Is a thing they call the Sea.
Pour some salt water over the floor-
Ugly I'm sure you'll allow it to be;
Suppose it extended a mile or more,
That's very like the Sea.
221

222
I had a vision of nursery maids;
Tens of thousands passed by me-
All leading children with wooden spades,
And this way by the Sea.
Who invented those spades of wood ?
Who was it cut them out of the tree?
None, I think, but an idiot could-
Or one that loved the Sea.
If you like your coffee with sand for dregs,
A decided hint of salt in your tea,
And a fishy taste in the very eggs-
By all means choose the Sea.
And if, with these dainties to drink and eat,
You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree,
And a chronic state of wet in your feet,
Then I recommend the Sea.
Did he mean all this, we wonder, this genial gen-
tleman, who haunted the seashore in search of little
girls, his pockets bulging with games and puzzles ?
He had also a good supply of safety-pins, in case
he saw someone who wanted to wade in the sea, but
whose skirts were in her way and who had no pin
handy. Then he would go gravely up to her and
present her with one of his stock.
In the earlier days he used to go to Sandown, in
the Isle of Wight, and there he met little Gertrude
Chataway, who must have been a very charming
child, for he promptly fell in love with her. This

223
was in 1875, and, from her description of him, he
must have been a very, very old gentleman-forty-
three at least. He happened to live next door to
Gertrude, and during those summer days she used
to watch him with much interest, for he had a way
of throwing back his head and sniffing in the salt
air that fascinated Gertrude, whose joy bubbled
over when at last he spoke to her. The two became
great friends. They used to sit for hours on the
steps of their house which led to the beach, and he
would delight the little girl with his wonderful sto-
ries, often illustrating them with a pencil as he
talked. The great charm of these stories lay in the
fact that some chance remark of Gertrude's would
wind him up; some question she asked would sug-
gest a story, and as it spread out into “ lovely non-
sense” she always felt in some way that she had
helped to make it grow.
This little girl was one of the child-friends who
clung to the sweet association all her life, just as
the little Liddell girls never grew quite away from
his love and interest. . It was to Gertrude that he
dedicated “The Hunting of the Snark,” and she
was the proud possessor not only of his friendship,
but of many interesting letters, covering a period of
at least ten years, during which time Gertrude
passed from little girlhood, though he never seemed
to realize the change.
Two of his prime favorites in the earlier days
were Ellen Terry, the well-known English actress,

224
and her sister Kate, who was also an actress of some
note,
Lewis Carroll, being always very fond of the
drama, found it through life his keenest delight, and
it was his good fortune to see little Ellen Terry in
the first prominent part she ever took. This was in
1856, when Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean played in
“ The Winter's Tale," and Ellen took the child's
character of Mamillius, the little son of the King.
Lewis Carroll was carried away with the tiny ac-
tress, and it did not take him long after that to make
her acquaintance. This no doubt began in the usual
way, a chat with the child behind the scenes, a call
upon her father and mother, and, finally, an intro-
duction to the whole family which, being nearly as
large as his own, could not fail to interest him
deeply.
There were two other little Terry girls, who at-
tracted him and to whom he was very kind, Flor-
ence and Marion. The boys, and there were five of
them, he never noticed of course, but the four little
girls came in for a good share of the most substan-
tial petting. Many a day at the seaside he gave
them—these busy little actresses—many a feast in
his own rooms, many a daytime frolic, for night
was their working time—not that they minded in
the least, for they loved their work. There was
much talk in those days about the harm in allowing
children to act at night, when they should be snug
in their beds dreaming of fairies. But Lewis Car-

225
roll thought nothing of the kind; he delighted in the
children's acting, and he knew, being half a child
himself, that the youngsters took as much delight in
their work as he did in seeing them. He always
contended that acting comes naturally to children;
from babyhood they “pretend,” and if they happen,
as in Ellen Terry's case and the case of other little
stage people he knew, to be born in the profession,
why, this “ pretending" is the finest kind of play
not work. So he was always on the side of the
little actors and actresses who did not want to be
taken away from the theater and put to bed.
Ellen Terry proved also to be one of his lifelong
friends; the talented actress found his praise a most
precious thing, and his criticism, always so honest,
and usually so keen and true, she accepted with the
grace of the great artist. Often, too, he asked her
aid for some other girl friend with dramatic talent,
and she never failed to lend a helping hand when
she could. From first to last her acting charmed
him. Often he would take a little girl to some
Shakespearean treat at the theater, and would raise
her to the “ seventh heaven” of delight by pencil-
ing a note to Miss Terry asking for an interview or
perhaps a photograph for his small companion, and
these requests were never refused.
Every Christmas the Rev. Charles Dodgson spent
with his sisters, who since their father's death had
lived at Guildford, in a pretty house called The
Chestnuts. His coming at Christmas was always

226
a great event, for of course some very youthful
ladies in the neighborhood were in a state of sup-
pressed excitement over his yearly arrival, which
meant Christmas jollity—with charades and ta-
bleaux and all sorts of odd and interesting games,
and, of course, stories.
One of his special Guildford favorites was Gay-
nor Simpson, to whom he wrote several of his clever
letters. In one, evidently an answer to hers, he
begged her never again to leave out the g in the
name Dodgson, asking in a very plaintive manner
what she would think if he left out the G in her
name and called her “Aynor " instead of Gaynor.
In this same letter he confessed that he never
danced except in his own peculiar way, that the last
house he danced in, the floors broke through, but as
the beams were only six inches thick, it was a very
poor sort of floor, when one came to think-that
stone arches were much better for his sort of danc-
ing.
Indeed, the poem he wrote about the sea must
have been just a bit of a joke, for it was at Margate,
another seaside resort, that he met Adelaide Paine,
another of his favorites, and to her he presented
a copy of “ The Hunting of the Snark," with an
acrostic on her name written on the fly leaf. This
little maid was further honored by receiving a pho-
tograph, not of Lewis Carroll, but of Mr. Dodgson,
and in a note to her mother he begged in his usual
odd way that she would never let any but her inti-

227
mate friends know anything about the name of
“Lewis Carroll,” as he did not wish people who
had heard of him to recognize him in the street.
The friendships that were not cemented at the
seaside or under the shelter of old “ Tom Quad”
were very often begun in the railway train. Eng-
lish trains are not like ours in America. In Lewis
Carroll's time the “first-class ” accommodations
were called carriages, in which four or five people,
often total strangers, were shut up for hours to-
gether, actually locked in by the guard; and if one
of these people chanced to be Lewis Carroll, and
another a restless, active little girl, why, in the twin-
kling of an eye the sign of fellowship had flashed
between them, and they were friends.
One special friend made in this fashion was a
dear little maid named Kathleen Eschwege, who
stayed a child to him always during their eighteen
years of friendship, in spite of all the changes the
years brought in their train; her marriage among
the rest, on which occasion he wrote her that as he
never gave wedding presents, he hoped the inclosed
he sent in his letter she would accept as an unwed-
ding present.
This letter bore the date of January 20, 1892;
five years later he wrote to acknowledge a photo- .
graph she had sent him in January, 1892, also her
wedding-card in August of the same year. But he
salved his conscience by reminding her that a cer-
tain biscuit-box-decorated with “ Looking-Glass "

228
pictures—which he had sent her in December, 1892,
had never been acknowledged by her.
Our “ don's” memory sometimes played him
tricks we see, especially in later years. On one oc-
casion, failing to recognize someone who passed
him on the street, he was much chagrined to find
out that he had been the gentleman's guest at din-
ner only the night before.
Another pleasant railway friendship was estab-
lished with three little Drury girls, as early as 1869.
They did not know who he was until he sent them
a copy of “ Alice in Wonderland ”—with the fol-,
lowing verse on the fly leaf:
TO THREE PUZZLED LITTLE GIRLS.
(From the Author.)
Three little maidens weary of the rail,
Three pairs of little ears listening to a tale,
Three little hands held out in readiness
For three little puzzles very hard to guess.
Three pairs of little eyes and open wonder-wide
At three little scissors lying side by side,
Three little mouths that thanked an unknown friend
For one little book he undertook to send.
Though whether they'll remember a friend or book or
day-
In three little weeks is very hard to say.
Edith Rix was another favorite but apparently
beyond the usual age, for his letters to her have
quite a grown-up tone, and he helped her through
many girlish quandaries with his wholesome advice.

229
There are scores of others—so many that their
very names would mean nothing to us unless we
knew the circumstances which began the acquaint-
ance, and the numerous incidents which could only
occur in the company of Lewis Carroll.
As we know, there were three great influences in
his life: his reverence for holy things, his fondness
for mathematics, and his love of little girls. It is
this last trait which colors our picture of him and
makes him stand forth in our minds apart from
other men of his time. There have been many
great preachers and eminent mathematicians, and
these brilliant men may have loved childhood in a
certain way, but to step aside from their high places
to mingle with the children would never have oc-
curred to them. The small girls who were “seen
and not heard ” dropped their eyes bashfully when
the great ones passed, and bobbed a little old-fash-
ioned curtsy in return for a stately preoccupied
nod. But not so Lewis Carroll. No childish eyes
ever sought his in vain. His own blue ones al-
ways smiled back, and there was something so
glowing in this smile which lit up his whole face,
that children, all unconsciously, drew near the
warmth of it.
His love for girls speaks well for the home-life
and surroundings of his earlier years, when in the
company of his seven sisters he learned to know
girls pretty thoroughly. These girls of whom we
have such scant knowledge possessed, we are sure,

230
some potent charm to make this “big brother”
forever afterwards the champion of little girls, and
being a thoughtful fellow, he must have watched
with pleasure the way they bloomed from childhood
to girlhood and from girlhood to womanhood, in
the sweet seclusion of Croft Rectory. It was this
intimacy and comradeship with his sisters which
made him so easily the intimate and comrade of so
many little girls, understanding all their traits and
peculiarities and their “girl nature" better some-
times than they did themselves.
Some of his friends moved in royal circles.
Princess Beatrice, who received the second presen-
tation copy of “ Alice in Wonderland," was one of
them; but in later years the two children of the
Duchess of Albany (Queen Victoria's daughter-in-
law), Alice and the young Duke, claimed his friend-
ship, and despite his preference for girls, Lewis
Carroll could not help liking the lad, whose gentle
disposition and studious habits set him somewhat
apart from other boys.
Near home, that is to say in Oxford, or more
properly, within a stone's throw of Christ Church
itself, dwelt the Rev. E. Hatch and his bright and
interesting family of children, with all of whom
Lewis Carroll was on the most intimate terms,
though his special favorite was Beatrice, better
known as Bee. This little girl came so close upon
the Liddell children in his long list of friends that
she almost caught the echo of those happy days of

231
“ Wonderland," and she has much to say about this
association in an interesting article published in the
Strand Magazine some years ago.
“My earliest recollections of Mr. Dodgson," she
writes, “ are connected with photography. He was
very fond of this art at one time, though he had en-
tirely given it up for many years latterly. He kept
various costumes and properties' with which to
dress us up, and of course that added to the fun.
What child would not thoroughly enjoy personating
a Japanese or a beggar child or a gypsy or an In-
dian? Sometimes there were excursions to the roof
of the college, which was easily accessible from the
windows of the studio. Or you might stand by
your tall friend's side in the tiny dark room, and
watch him while he poured the contents of several
little strong-smelling bottles on the glass picture of
yourself that looked so funny with its black face;
and when you grew tired of this there were many
delights to be found in the cupboards in the big
room downstairs. Musical boxes of different colors
and different tunes, the dear old woolly bear that
walked when he was wound up, toys, picture-books,
and packets of photographs of other children, who
had also enjoyed these mornings of bliss.
“ The following letter written to me in 1873,
about a large wax doll that Mr. Dodgson had pre-
sented to me, and which I left behind when I went
on a visit from home, is an interesting specimen.
Emily and Mabel [referred to in the letter) were
16

232
other dolls of mine and known also by him, but
though they have long since departed this life, I need
hardly say I still possess the doll ' Alice.
“My dear Birdie: I met her just outside Tom
Gate, walking very stiffly and I think she was trying
to find her way to my rooms. So I said, “Why
have you come here without Birdie?” So she said,
“Birdie's gone! and Emily's gone! and Mabel isn't
kind to me!”! And two little waxy tears came
running down her cheeks.
“Why, how stupid of me! I've never told who
it was all the time! It was your own doll. I was
very glad to see her, and took her to my room, and
gave her some Vesta matches to eat, and a cup of
nice melted wax to drink, for the poor little thing
was very hungry and thirsty after her long walk.
So I said, “Come and sit by the fire and let's have a
comfortable chat?' 'Oh, no! no!' she said, 'I'd
much rather not; you know I do melt so very eas-
ily!' And she made me take her quite to the other
side of the room, where it was very cold; and then
she sat on my knee and fanned herself with a pen-
wiper, because she said she was afraid the end of
her nose was beginning to melt.
“You have no idea how careful we have to be
we dolls,' she said. “Why, there was a sister of
mine-would you believe it?—she went up to the
fire to warm her hands, and one of her hands
dropped right off! There now!' 'Of course it
dropped right off,' I said, “because it was the right
I belia Why, xz ful w

233
hand.' 'And how do you know it was the right
hand, Mister Carroll ? ' the doll said. So I said, 'I
think it must have been the right hand because the
other hand was left.'
“The doll said, 'I shan't laugh. It's a very bad
joke. Why, even a common wooden doll could
make a better joke than that. And besides they've
made my mouth so stiff and hard that I can't laugh
if I try ever so much.' 'Don't be cross about it,' I
said, “but tell me this: I'm going to give Birdie and
the other children one photograph each, whichever
they choose; which do you think Birdie will
choose?' 'I don't know,' said the doll; 'you'd
better ask her!' So I took her home in a hansom
cab. Which would you like, do you think? Arthur
as Cupil? or Arthur and Wilfred together? or you
and Ethel as beggar children? or Ethel standing on
a box? or, one of yourself?
“ Your affectionate friend,
“'LEWIS CARROLL.'”
There were, as you see, special occasions when
boys were accepted, or rather tolerated, and special
boys with whom he exchanged courtesies from time
to time. The little Hatch boys were favored, we
cannot say for their own small sakes, but because
there were two little sisters and their feelings had to
be considered. Lewis Carroll even took their pic-
tures, and went so far as to write a little prologue
for Beatrice and her brother Wilfred. The “grown-

234
ups” were to give some private theatricals which
the children were to introduce in the following
dialogue :
(Enter Beatrice leading Wilfred. She leaves him at cen-
ter (front], and after going round on tiptoe to make
sure they are not overheard, returns and takes his arm.)
B. Wiffie! I'm sure that something is the matter !
All day there's been-oh, such a fuss and clatter!
Mamma's been trying on a funny dress,
I never saw the house in such a mess!
(Puts her arms around his neck.)
Is there a secret, Wiffie?
W. (Shaking her off.) Yes, of course!
B. And you won't tell it? (Whimpers.) Then you're
very cross!
(Turns away from him and clasps her hands ecstat-
ically.)
I'm sure of this! It's something quite uncommon!
W. (Stretching up his arms with a mock heroic air.)
Oh, Curiosity! Thy name is woman!
(Puts his arm round her coaxingly.)
Well, Birdie, then I'll tell! (Mysteriously.)
What should you say
If they were going to act-a little play?
B. (Jumping up and clapping her hands.)
I'd say, “How nice!”
W. (Pointing to audience.)
But will it please the rest?
B. Oh, yes! Because, you know, they'll do their best !
(Turns to audience.)
You'll praise them, won't you, when you've seen the
play?
Just say, “How nice !” before you go away!
(They run away hand in hand.)

235
vas
Of course the little girl had the last word, but
then, as Lewis Carroll himself would say, “ Little
girls usually had.”
This prologue, Miss Hatch tells us, was Lewis
Carroll's only attempt in the dramatic line, and the
two tots made a pretty picture as they ran off the
stage.
“Mr. Dodgson's chief form of entertaining,”
writes Miss Hatch, “was giving dinner parties.
Do not misunderstand me, nor picture to yourself a
long row of guests on either side of a gayly-deco-
rated table. Mr. Dodgson's theory was that it was
much more enjoyable to have your friends singly,
consequently these dinner parties,' as he liked to
call them, consisted almost always of one guest
only, and that one a child friend. One of his charm-
ing and characteristic little notes, written in his
clear writing, often on a half sheet of note paper and
signed with the C.L.D. monogram to would ar-
rive, containing an invitation, of which the fol-
lowing is a specimen.” [Though written when
Beatrice was no longer a little girl.]
Ch. Ch. Nov. 21, '96.
“MY DEAR BEE:—The reason I have for so
long a time not visited the hive is a logical one,"
(he was busy on his symbolic Logic), “but is
not (as you might imagine) that I think there is
no more honey in it! Will you come and dine

236
with me? Any day would suit me, and I would
fetch you at 6:30.
“• Ever your affectionate
“.C.L.D.'
“Let us suppose this invitation has been ac-
cepted. . . . After turning in at the door of No. 7
staircase, and mounting a rather steep and winding
stair, we find ourselves outside a heavy black door,
of somewhat prisonlike appearance, over which is
painted 'The Rev. C. L. Dodgson.' Then a pas-
sage, then a door with glass panels, and at last we
reach the familiar room that we love so well. It is
large and lofty and extremely cheerful-looking. All
around the walls are bookcases and under them
the cupboards of which I have spoken, and which
even now we long to see opened that they may pour
out their treasures.
“Opposite to the big window with its cushioned
seat is the fireplace; and this is worthy of some no-
tice on account of the lovely red tiles which repre-
sent the story of 'The Hunting of the Snark.' Over
the mantelpiece hang three painted portraits of child
friends, the one in the middle being the picture of a
little girl in a blue cap and coat who is carrying a
pair of skates.”
This picture is a fine likeness of Xie (Alexandra)
Kitchin, the little daughter of the Dean of Durham,
another of his Oxford favorites.
"Mr. Dodgson,” continues Miss Hatch, "seats

237
his guest in a corner of the red sofa, in front of the
fireplace, and the few minutes before dinner are
occupied with anecdotes about other child friends,
small or grown up, or anything in particular that has
happened to himself. . . . Dinner is served in the
smaller room, which is also filled with bookcases and
books. . . . Those who have had the privilege of
enjoying a college dinner need not be told how ex-
cellent it is. ... The rest of the evening slips away
very quickly, there is so much to be shown. You
may play a game-one of Mr. Dodgson's own in-
vention“... or you may see pictures, lovely
drawings of fairies, whom your host tells you' you
can't be sure don't really exist.' Or you may have
music if you wish it.”
This was of course before the days of the phono-
graph, but Lewis Carroll had the next best thing,
which Miss Hatch describes as an organette, in a
large square box, through the side of which a handle
is affixed. “Another box holds the tunes, circular
perforated cards, all carefully catalogued by their
owner. The picture of the author of ' Alice' keenly
enjoying every note as he solemnly turns the han-
dle, and raises or closes the lid of the box to vary
the sound, is more worthy of your delight than the
music itself. Never was there a more delightful
host for a dinner-party' or one who took such
pains for your entertainment, fresh and interesting
to the last.”
One of the first things a little girl learned in her

238
intercourse with Lewis Carroll was to be methodical
and orderly, as he was himself, in the arrangement
of papers, photographs, and books; he kept lists and
registers of everything. Miss Hatch tells of a won-
derful letter register of his own invention “ that not
only recorded the names of his correspondents and
the dates of their letters, but also noted the contents
of each communication, so that in a few seconds he
could tell you what you had written to him about
on a certain day in years gone by.
“ Another register contained a list of every menu
supplied to every guest who dined at Mr. Dodg-
son's table. Yet,” she explains, “ his dinners were
simple enough, never more than two courses. But
everything that he did must be done in the
most perfect manner possible, and the same care
and attention would be given to other people's
affairs, if in any way he could assist or give them
pleasure.
“If he took you up to London to see a play, you
were no sooner seated in the railway carriage than a
game was produced from his bag and all the occu-
pants were invited to join in playing a kind of
* Halma' or 'draughts' of his own invention, on
the little wooden board that had been specially made
at his design for railway use, with 'men'warranted
not to tumble down, because they fitted into little
holes in the board.”
Children, little girls especially, remember through
life the numberless small kindnesses that are shown

239
to them. Is it any wonder, then, that the name of
Lewis Carroll is held in such loving memory by the
scores of little girls he drew about him? Beatrice
Hatch was only one among many to feel the warmth
of his love. This quiet, almost solitary, man whose
home was in the shadow of a great college, whose
daily life was such a long walk of dull routine,
could yet find time to make his own sunshine and to
draw others into the light of it.
But the children did their part too. He grew de-
pendent on them as the years rolled on; a fairy circle
of girls was always drawing him to them, and he
was made one of them. They told him their childish
secrets feeling sure of a ready sympathy and a quick
appreciation. He seemed to know his way in-
stinctively to a girl's heart; she felt for him an af-
fection, half of comradeship, half of reverence, for
there was something inspiring in the fearless car-
riage of the head, the clear, serene look in the eyes,
that seemed to pierce far ahead upon the path over
which their own young feet were stumbling, per-
haps.
With the passing of the years, some of the seven
sisters married, and a fair crop of nieces and
nephews shot up around him, also some small cous-
ins in whom he took a deep interest. It is to one of
these that he dedicated his poem called “Matilda
Jane,” in honor of the doll who bore the name,
which meant nothing in the world to such an unre-
sponsive bit of doll-dom.
1 unre-

240
Matilda Jane, you never look
At any toy or picture book;
I show you pretty things in vain,
You must be blind, Matilda Jane !
I ask you riddles, tell you tales,
But all our conversation fails;
You never answer me again,
I fear you're dumb, Matilda Jane !
Matilda, darling, when I call,
You never seem to hear at all;
I shout with all my might and main,
But you're so deaf, Matilda Jane !
Matilda Jane, you needn't mind,
For though you're deaf and dumb and blind,
There's some one loves you, it is plain,
And that is me, Matilda Jane !
A little tender-hearted, ungrammatical, motherly
“me”-how well the writer knew the small
“Bessie” whose affection for this doll inspired the
verses!
In after years when more serious work held him
close to his study, and he made a point of declining
all invitations, he took care that no small girl should
be put on his black list. “If,” says Miss Hatch,
“ you were very anxious to get him to come to your
house on any particular day, the only chance was not
to invite him, but only to inform him that you would
be at home; otherwise he would say “ As you have
invited me, I cannot come, for I have made a rule

241
to decline all invitations, but I will come the next
day,'” and in answer to an invitation to tea, he
wrote her in his whimsical way:
“What an awful proposition! To drink tea from
four to six would tax the constitution even of a
hardened tea-drinker. For me, who hardly ever
touches it, it would probably be fatal.”
If only we could read half the clever letters which
passed between Lewis Carroll and his girl friends,
what a volume of wit and humor, of sound common
sense, of clever nonsense we should find! Yet be-
hind it all, that underlying seriousness which made
his friendship so precious to those who were so for-
tunate as to possess it. The “ little girl ” whose
loving picture of him tells us so much lived near
him all her life; she felt his influence in all the little
things that go to make up a child's day, long after
the real childhood had passed her by. And so with
all the girls who knew and loved him, and even
those to whom his name was but a suggestion of
what he really was.
Surely this fairy ring of girls encircles the Eng-
lish-speaking world, the girls whom Lewis Carroll
loved, the hundreds he knew, the millions he had
never seen.

CHAPTER XIII.
HEN the question of dramatizing the
“ Alice” books was placed before the
author, by Mr. Savile Clarke, who was
to undertake the work, he consented
gladly enough. It was to be an operetta of two
acts; the libretto, or story part, by Mr. Clarke him-
self, the music by Mr. Walter Slaughter, and the
only condition Lewis Carroll made was that noth-
ing should be written or acted which should in any
way be unsuitable for childen.
Of course, everything was done under his eye,
and he wrote an extra song for the ghosts of the
Oysters, who had been eaten by the Walrus and the
Carpenter; he also finished that poetic gem, “ 'Tis
the Voice of the Lobster.”
“ 'Tis the voice of the Lobster," I heard him declare,
“ You baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.”
As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose,
Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.
When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark
And talks with the utmost contempt of a shark;
242

243
But when the tide rises and sharks are around,
His words have a timid and tremulous sound.
I passed by his garden, and marked with one eye
How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie:
The Panther took pie, crust and gravy and meat,
While the Owl had the dish, for his share of the treat.
When the pie was all finished, the Owl-as a boon
Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon;
While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
And concluded the banquet
That is how the poem originally ended, but music-
ally that would never do, so the last two lines were
altered in this fashion :
“But the Panther obtained both the fork and the knife,
So when he lost his temper, the Owl lost his life,"
and a rousing little song it made.
The play was produced at the Prince of Wales'
Theater, during Christmas week of 1886, where
it was a great success. Lewis Carroll himself
specially praises the Wonderland act, notably the
Mad Tea Party. The Hatter was finely done by
Mr. Sidney Harcourt, the Dormouse by little Do-
rothy d'Alcourt, aged six-and-a-half, and Phæbe
Carlo, he tells us, was a “splendid Alice.”
He went many times to see his “ dream child” on
the stage, and was always very kind to the little
actresses, whose dainty work made his work such
a success. Phæbe Carlo became a very privileged
young person and enjoyed many treats of his
dan

244
giving, to say nothing of a personal gift of a copy
of “ Alice” from the delighted author.
After the London season, the play was taken
through the English provinces and was much ap-
preciated wherever it went. On one occasion a
company gave a week's performance at Brighton,
and Lewis Carroll happening to be there one after-
noon, came across three of the small actresses down
on the beach and spent several hours with them.
“Happy, healthy little girls ” he called them, and
no doubt that beautiful afternoon they had the time
of their lives.
These children, he found—and he had made the
subject quite a study—had been acting every day in
the week, and twice on the day before he met them,
and yet were energetic enough to get up each morn-
ing at seven for a sea bath, to run races on the pier,
and to be quite ready for another perfomance that
night.
On December 26, 1888, there was an elaborate
revival of “ Alice” at the Royal Globe Theater. In
the London Times the next morning appeared this
notice:
“. Alice in Wonderland,' having failed to exhaust its
popularity at the Prince of Wales' Theater, has been re-
vived at the Globe for a series of matinées during the
holiday season. Many members of the old cast remain in
the bill, but a new ‘Alice' is presented in Miss Isa Bow-
man, who is not only a wonderful actress for her years,
but also a nimble dancer.

245
visit on the dreaderom parade
"In its new surroundings the fantastic scenes of the
story—so cleverly transferred from the book to the stage
by Mr. Savile Clarke-lose nothing of their original
brightness and humor. 'Alice's Adventures in Wonder-
land and Through the Looking-Glass' have the rare
charm of freshness for children and for their elders, and
the many strange personages concerned—the White Rab-
bit, the Caterpillar, the Cheshire Cat, the Hatter, the
Dormouse, the Gryphon, the Mock Turtle, the Red and
White Kings and Queens, the Walrus, Humpty-Dumpty,
Tweedledum and Tweedledee, and all the rest of them-
being seen at home, so to speak, and not on parade as
in an ordinary pantomime. Even the dreaded Jabberwock
pays an unconventional visit to the company from the
'flies,' and his appearance will not be readily forgotten.
As before, Mr. Walter Slaughter's music is an agreeable
element to the performance. ..."
The programme of this performance certainly
spreads a feast before the children's eyes. First of
all, think of a forest in autumn! (They had to
change the season a little to get the bright colors of
red and yellow.) Here it is that Alice falls asleep
and the Elves sing to her. Then there is the awak-
ening in Wonderland—such a Wonderland as few
children dreamed of. And then all our favorites
appear and do just the things we always thought
they would do if they had the chance. The Che-
shire Cat grins and vanishes, and then the grin ap-
pears without the cat, and then the cat grows behind
the grin, and everything is so impossible and won-
derful that one shivers with delight. There is a
good old fairy tale that every child knows; it is

246
called “Oh! if I could but shiver!” and everyone
who really enjoys a fairy tale understands the feel-
ing—the delight of shivering—to see the Jabber-
wock pass before you in all his terrifying, delicious
ugliness, flapping his huge wings, rolling his bulg-
ing eyes, and opening and shutting those dreadful
jaws of his; and yet to know he isn't “ really, real”
any more than Sir John Tenniel's picture of him
in the dear old “ Alice” book at home, that you
can actually go with Alice straight into Wonder-
land and back again, safe and sound, and really see
what happened just as she did, and actually squeeze
through into Looking-Glass Land, all made so de-
lightfully possible by clever scenery and acting...
A more charming, dainty little “ Alice” never
danced herself into the heart of anyone as Isa Bow-
man did into the heart of Lewis Carroll. She came
into his life when all of his best-beloved children
had passed forever beyond the portals of childhood,
never to return; loved more in these later days for
the memory of what they had been. But here was
a child who aroused all the associations of earlier
years, who had made “ Alice” real again, whose
clever acting gave just that dreamlike, elfin touch
which the real Alice of Long Ago had suggested; a
sweet-natured, lovable, most attractive child, the
child perhaps who won his deepest affections
because she came to him when the others had
vanished, and clung to him in the twilight.
There must have been several little Bowmans.

247
We know of four little sisters—Isa, Emsie, Nellie,
and Maggie, and Master Charles Bowman was the
Cheshire Cat in the revival of “ Alice in Wonder-
land,” and to all of these—we are considering the
girls of course, the boy never counted-Lewis Car-
roll showed his sweetest, most lovable side. They
called him “Uncle," and a more devoted uncle they
could not possibly have found. As for Isa herself,
there was a special niche all her own; she was, as he
often told her, “his little girl," and in a loving
memoir of him she has given to the world of chil-
dren a beautiful picture of what he really was.
There was something in the grip of his firm white
hands, in his glance so deeply sympathetic, so ten-
der and kind, that always stirred the little girl just
as her sharp eyes noted a certain peculiarity in
his walk. His stammer also impressed her, for
it generally came when he least expected it, and
though he tried all his life to cure it, he never suc-
ceeded.
His shyness, too, was very noticeable, not so much
with children, except just at first until he knew them
well, but with grown people he was, as she put it,
“almost old-maidishly prim in his manner.” This
shyness was shown in many ways, particularly in a
morbid horror of having his picture taken. As
fond as he was of taking other people, he dreaded
seeing his own photograph among strangers, and
once when Isa herself made a caricature of him, he
suddenly got up from his seat, took the drawing out
17

oi ber basis, tore it ia small pieces and threw it
into the ice without a word; then he caught the
frightened 1ne'e girl in his strorg arms and kissed
her passi rate y, his face, at first so flushed and
argty, scitering with a ter.der light.
Vary and many a happy time she spent with him
at Oxford He found rooms for her just outside
the college gates, and a nice comfortable dame to
take charge of her. The long happy days were
spent in his rooms, and every night at nine she was
taken over to the little house in St. Aldates (“St.
Olds") and put to bed by the landlady.
In the morning the deep notes of “Great Tom”
woke her and then began another lovely day with
her “Uncle.” She speaks of two tiny turret rooms,
one on each side of his staircase in Christ Church.
“He used to tell me," she writes, “ that when I
grew up and became married, he would give me the
two little rooms, so that if I ever disagreed with my
husband, we could each of us retire to a turret until
we had made up our quarrel."
She, too, was fascinated by his collection of
music-boxes, the finest, she thought, to be found
anywhere in the world. “There were big black
ebony boxes with glass tops, through which you
could see all the works. There was a big box with
a handle, which it was quite hard exercise for a lit-
tle girl to turn, and there must have been twenty or
thirty little ones which could only play one tune.
Sometimes one of the musical boxes would not play

249
properly and then I always got tremendously ex-
cited. Uncle used to go to a drawer in the table
and produce a box of little screw-drivers and
punches, and while I sat on his knee, he would un-
screw the lid and take out the wheels to see what
was the matter. He must have been a clever mech-
anist, for the result was always the same after
a longer or shorter period, the music began again.
Sometimes, when the musical boxes had played all
their tunes, he used to put them in the box back-
wards, and was as pleased as I was at the comic
effect of the music 'standing on its head,' as he
phrased it.
“ There was another and very wonderful toy
which he sometimes produced for me, and this was
known as “ The Bat.' The ceilings of the rooms in
which he lived were very high, indeed, and ad-
mirably suited for the purposes of “The Bat.' It
was an ingeniously constructed toy of gauze and
wire, which actually flew about the room like a bat.
It was worked by a piece of twisted elastic, and it
could fly for about half a minute. I was always
a little afraid of this toy because it was too lifelike,
but there was a fearful joy in it. When the music
boxes began to pall, he would get up from his chair
and look at me with a knowing smile. I always
knew what was coming, even before he began to
speak, and I used to dance up and down in tre-
mendous anticipation.
“Isa, my darling,' he would say, 'once upon a

250
time there was someone called Bob, the Bat! and he
lived in the top left-hand drawer of the writing
table. What could he do when Uncle wound him
up?'”
“ And then I would squeak out breathlessly:
' He could really fly!'”
And Bob the Bat had many wonderful adven-
tures. She tells us how, on a hot summer morning
when the window was wide open, Bob flew out into
the garden and landed in a bowl of salad that one of
the servants was carrying to someone's room. The
poor fellow was so frightened by this sudden appari-
tion that he promptly dropped the bowl, breaking it
into countless pieces.
Lewis Carroll never liked “his little girl” to ex-
aggerate. “I remember,” she tells us, “how an-
noyed he once was when, after a morning's sea
bathing at Eastbourne, I exclaimed: 'Oh, this salt
water, it always makes my hair as stiff as a
poker!'
“He impressed upon me quite irritably that no
little girl's hair could ever possibly get as stiff as a
poker. “If you had said “as stiff as wires " it
would have been more like it, but even that would
have been an exaggeration. And then seeing I
was a little frightened, he drew for me a picture
of “The little girl called Isa, whose hair turned
into pokers because she was always exaggerating
things.'
“' I nearly died of laughing 'was another expres-

251
sion that he particularly disliked; in fact, any form
of exaggeration generally called from him a re-
proof, though he was sometimes content to make
fun. For instance, my sisters and I had sent him
‘ millions of kisses' in a letter.' Here is his an-
swer:
“Ch. Ch. Oxford. Ap. 14, 1890.
“My own DARLING:
“It's all very well for you and Nellie and Emsie
to write in millions of hugs and kisses, but please
consider the time it would occupy your poor old
very busy uncle! Try. hugging and kissing Emsie
for a minute by the watch and I don't think you'll
manage it more than 20 times a minute. “Mil-
lions ” must mean two millions at least.'”
Then follows a characteristic example in arith-
metic:
20)2,000,000 hugs and kisses.
60) 100,000 minutes.
12)1,666 hours.
6)138 days (at twelve hours a day).
23 weeks.
“I couldn't go on hugging and kissing more
than 12 hours a day; and I wouldn't like to spend
Sundays that way. So you see it would take 23
weeks of hard work. Really, my dear child, I can-
not spare the time.
“Why haven't I written since my last letter?

252
Why, how could I have written since the last time I
did write? Now you just try it with kissing. Go
and kiss Vellie, from me, several times, and take
care to manage it so as to have kissed her since the
last time you did kiss her. Now go back to your
place and I'll question you.
““Have you kissed her several times?'
““Yes, darling Uncle.'
“'What o'clock was it when you gave her the
last kiss?'
“Five minutes past 10, Uncle.'
"• Very well, now, have you kissed her since?'
"Well-I-ahem! ahem! ahem! (excuse me,
Uncle, I've got a bad cough) 1-think-that-I-
that is, you know, I–
“Yes, I see! “ Isa” begins with “I,” and it
seems to me as if she was going to end with “I”
this time!'”
The rest of the letter refers to Isa's visit to
America, when she went to play the little Duke of
York in “ Richard III.”
"Mind you don't write me from there," he warns
her. “ Please, please, no more horrid letters from
you! I do hate them so! And as for kissing them
when I get them, why, I'd just as soon kiss-kiss-
kiss—you, you tiresome thing! So there now!
“ Thank you very much for those 2 photographs
-I liked them—hum-pretty well. I can't hon-
estly say I thought them the very best I had ever
seen.

253
“ Please give my kindest regards to your mother,
and of a kiss to Nellie, and oto of a kiss to Emsie,
goodooo of a kiss to yourself. So with fondest love,
I am, my darling,
“Your loving Uncle,
“C. L. DODGSON.”
And at the end of this letter, teeming with fun
and laughter, could anything be sweeter than this
postscript?
“I've thought about that little prayer you asked
me to write for Nellie and Emsie. But I would
like first to have the words of the one I wrote for
you, and the words of what they say now, if they
say any. And then I will pray to our Heavenly
Father to help me to write a prayer that will be
really fit for them to use.”
In letter-writing, and even in his story-telling,
Lewis Carroll made frequent use of italics. His own
speech was so emphatic that his writing would have
looked odd without them, and many of his cleverest
bits of nonsense would have been lost but for their
aid.
Another time Isa ended a letter to him with “ All
join me in lufs and kisses.” Now Miss Isa was
away on a visit and had no one near to join her in
such a message, but that is what she would have
put had she been at home, and this is the letter he
wrote in reply:

254 ·
“7 Lushington Road, Eastbourne,
“Aug. 30, '90.
“Oh, you naughty, naughty, bad, wicked little
girl! You forgot to put a stamp on your letter,
and your poor old Uncle had to pay Twopence!
His last Twopence! Think of that. I shall pun-
ish you severely for this, once I get you here. So
tremble! Do you hear? Be good enough to
tremble!
" I've only time for one question to-day. Who
in the world are the 'all' that join you in 'lufs
and kisses ’? Weren't you fancying you were at
home and sending messages (as people constantly
do) from Nellie and Emsie, without their having
given any ? It isn't a good plan—that sending mes-
sages people haven't given. I don't mean it's in the
least untruthful, because everybody knows how
commonly they are sent without having been given;
but it lessens the pleasure of receiving messages.
My sisters write to me with best love from all.' I
know it isn't true, so don't value it much. The other
day the husband of one of my child-friends' (who
always writes 'your loving') wrote to me and ended
with ‘Ethel joins me in kindest regards.' In my
answer I said (of course in fun)—I am not going
to send Ethel kindest regards, so I won't send her
any message at all.' Then she wrote to say she
didn't even know he was writing. 'Of course I
would have sent best love,' and she added that she

255
had given her husband a piece of her mind. Poor
Husband!
“ Your always loving Uncle,
“ C.L.D."
These initials were always joined as a monogram
and written backward, thus, t, which no doubt,
after the years of practice he had, he dashed off with
an easy flourish. His general writing was not very
legible, but when he was writing for the press he
was very careful. “Why should the printers have
to work overtime because my letters are ill-formed
and my words run into each other?” he once said,
and Miss Bowman has put in her little volume the
facsimile of a diary he once wrote for her, where
every letter was carefully formed so that Isa could
read every word herself.
“They were happy days,” she writes, “those
days in Oxford, spent with the most fascinating
companion that a child could have. In our walks
about the old town, in our visits to the Cathedral or
Chapel Hall, in our visits to his friends, he was an
ideal companion, but I think I was always happiest
when we came back to his rooms and had tea alone;
when the fire glow (it was always winter when I
stayed in Oxford) threw fantastic shadows about
the quaint room, and the thoughts of the prosiest
people must have wandered a little into fairyland.
The shifting firelight seemed almost to etherealize
that kindly face, and as the wonderful stories fell

256
from his lips, and his eyes lighted on me with the
sweetest smile that ever a man wore, I was con-
scious of a love and reverence for Charles Dodgson
that became nearly an adoration.”
“ He was very particular,” she tells us, “about
his tea, which he always made himself, and in order
that it should draw properly he would walk about
the room, swinging the teapot from side to side, for
exactly ten minutes. The idea of the grave profes-
sor promenading his book-lined study and carefully
waving a teapot to and fro may seem ridiculous, but
all the minutiæ of life received an extreme attention
at his hands."
The diary referred to, which he so carefully
printed for Isa, covered several days' visit to Oxford
in 1888, which oddly enough happened to be in mid-
summer, and being her first, was never forgotten.
It was written in six “ chapters ” and jotted down
faithfully the happenings of each day. What little
girl could resist the feast of fun and frolic he had
planned for those happy days!
First, he met her at Paddington station; then he
took her to see a panorama of the Falls of Niagara,
after which they had dinner with a Mrs. Dymes, and
two of her children, Helen and Maud, went with
them to Terry's Theater to see “ Little Lord Faunt-
leroy" played by Vera Beringer, another little ac-
tress friend of Lewis Carroll. After this they all
took the Metropolitan railway; the little Dymes
girls got off at their station, but Isa and the Aged

257
Aged Man, as he called himself, went on to Ox-
ford. There they saw everything to be seen, begin-
ning with Christ Church, where the “A.A.M.”
lived, and here and there Lewis Carroll managed
to throw bits of history into the funny little diary.
They saw all the colleges, and Christ Church Mead-
ow, and the barges which the Oxford crews used
as boathouses, and took long walks, and went to
St. Mary's Church on Sunday, and lots of other
interesting things.
Every year she stayed a while with him at East-
bourne, where she tells us she was even happier if
possible. Her day at Eastbourne began very early.
Her room faced his, and after she was dressed in
the morning she would steal into the little passage
quiet as a mouse, and sit on the top stair, her eye on
his closed door, watching for the signal of admis-
sion into his room; this was a newspaper pushed
under his door. The moment she saw that, she was
at liberty to rush in and Aing herself upon him, after
which excitement they went down to breakfast.
Then he read a chapter from the Bible and made her
tell it to him afterwards as a story of her own, be-
ginning always with, “Once upon a time.” After
which there was a daily visit to the swimming-bath
followed by one to the dentist—he always insisted
on this, going himself quite as regularly.
After lunch, which with him consisted of a glass
of sherry and a biscuit, while little Miss Isa ate a
good substantial dinner, there was a game of back-

garmen, of which be was very food, and then a
kr.g, boog wax to the top oi Beachy Head, which
Isa bated. Ste says:
“Lewis Carroll believed very much in a great
amount of exercise, and said one should always go
to bed physically wearied with the exercise of the
day. Accordingly, there was no way out of it, and
every afternoon I had to walk to the top of Beachy
Head. He was very good and kind. He would in-
vent all sorts of new games to beguile the tedium
of the way. One very curious and strange trait in
his character was shown in these walks. I used to
be very fond of flowers and animals also. A pretty
dog or a hedge of honeysuckle was always a pleasant
event upon our walk to me. And yet he himself
cared for neither flowers nor animals. Tender and
kind as he was, simple and unassuming in all his
tastes, yet he did not like flowers. ... He knew chil-
dren so thoroughly and well, that it is all the stran-
ger that he did not care for things that generally
attract them so much. ... When I was in raptures
over a poppy or a dog-rose, he would try hard to be
as interested as I was, but even to my childish eyes
it was an effort, and he would always rather invent
some new game for us to play at. Once, and once
only, I remember him to have taken an interest in a
flower, and that was because of the folklore that
was attached to it, and not because of the beauty of
the flower itself.
“... One day while we sat under a great tree,

259
and the hum of the myriad insect life rivaled the
murmur of the far-away waves, he took a foxglove
from the heap that lay in my lap, and told me the
story of how it came by its name; how in the old
days, when all over England there were great for-
ests, like the forest of Arden that Shakespeare
loved, the pixies, the little folks,' used to wander
at night in the glades, like Titania and Oberon
and Puck, and because they took great pride in
their dainty hands they made themselves gloves,
out of the flowers. So the particular flower that
the little folks' used came to be called 'folks'
gloves.' Then, because the country people were
rough and clumsy in their talk, the name was
shortened into 'foxgloves,' the name that everyone
uses now.”
This special walk always ended in the coast-
guard's house, where they partook of tea and rock
cake, and here most of his prettiest stories were told.
The most thrilling part occurred when “ the children
came to a deep dark wood,” always described with a
solemn dropping of the voice; by that Isa knew that
the exciting part was coming, then she crept nearer
to him, and he held her close while he finished the
tale. Isa, as was quite natural, was a most dramatic
little person, so she always knew what emotions
would suit the occasion, and used them like the
clever little actress that she was.
We find something very beautiful in this intimacy
between the grave scholar and the light-hearted, in-

260
nocent little girl, who used to love to watch him in
some of those deep silences which neither cared to
break. This small maid understood his every mood.
A beautiful sunset, she tells us, touched him deeply.
He would take off his hat and let the wind toss his
hair, and look seaward with a very grave face. Once
she saw tears in his eyes, and he gripped her hand
very hard as they turned away.
Perhaps, what caught her childish fancy more
than anything else, was his observance of Sunday.
He always took Isa twice to church, and she went
because she wanted to go; he did not believe in forc-
ing children in such matters, but he made a point of
slipping some interesting little book in his pocket, so
in case she got tired, or the sermon was beyond her,
she would have something pleasant to do instead
of staring idly about the church or falling asleep,
which was just as bad. Another peculiarity, she
tells us, was his habit of keeping seated at the
entrance of the choir. He contended that the
rising of the congregation made the choir-boys
conceited.
One could go on telling anecdotes of Lewis Car-
roll and this well-beloved child, but of a truth his
own letters will show far better than any descrip-
tion how he regarded this “star” child of his. So
far as her acting went, he never spared either praise
or criticism where he thought it just. Here is a
letter criticising her acting as the little Duke of
York:

261
“Ch. Ch. Oxford. Ap. 4, '89.
“ MY LORD DUKE:—The photographs your Grace
did me the honor of sending arrived safely; and I
can assure your Royal Highness that I am very glad
to have them, and like them very much, particularly
the large head of your late Royal Uncle's little, little
son. I do not wonder that your excellent Uncle
Richard should say 'off with his head' as a hint to
the photographer to print it off. Would your High-
ness like me to go on calling you the Duke of York,
or shall I say 'my own darling Isa'? Which do
you like best?
“Now, I'm gong to find fault with my pet about
her acting. What's the good of an old Uncle like
me except to find fault?”
Then follows some excellent criticism on the
proper emphasis of words, explained so that the
smallest child could understand; he also notes some
mispronounced words, and then he adds:
“One thing more. (What an impertinent uncle!
Always finding fault!) You're not as natural when
acting the Duke as you were when you acted Alice.
You seemed to me not to forget yourself enough.
It was not so much a real prince talking to his
brother and uncle; it was Isa Bowman talking to
people she didn't care much about, for an audience
to listen to. I don't mean it was that all through,
but sometimes you were artificial. Now, don't be
jealous of Miss Hatton when I say she was sweetly

262
natural. She looked and spoke like a real Prince of
Wales. And she didn't seem to know there was any
audience. If you ever get to be a good actress (as
I hope you will) you must learn to forget ‘Isa' al-
together, and be the character you are playing. Try
to think 'This is really the Prince of Wales. I'm
his little brother and I'm very glad to meet him, and
I love him very much, and this is really my uncle;
he is very kind and lets me say saucy things to him,'
and do forget that there's anybody else listening!
“My sweet pet, I hope you won't be offended
with me for saying what I fancy might make your
acting better.
“ Your loving old Uncle,
“ CHARLES.
“X for Nellie.
“X for Maggie. “X for Isa.”
“X for Emsie.
The crosses were unmistakably kisses. He was
certainly a most affectionate “Uncle.” He rarely
signed his name “Charles.” It was only on special
occasions and to very “special” people.
Here is another letter written to Isa's sister
Nellie, thanking her for a “tidy” she made him.
(He called it an Antimacassar.) “The only or-
dinary thing about it,” Isa tells us, “is the date."
The letter reads backward. One has to begin at
the very bottom and read up, instead of reading
from the top downward:

263
“Nov. I, 1891.
“ C.L.D., Uncle loving your! Instead grand-
son his to it give to had you that so, years 80 or 70
for it forgot you that was it pity a what and; him of
fond so were you wonder don't I and, gentleman old
nice very a was he. For it made you that him been
have must it see you so: Grandfather my was, then
alive was that, ' Dodgson Uncle' only the, born was
I before long was that see you then But. ‘Dodgson
Uncle for pretty thing some make I'll now,' it began
you when yourself to said you that, me telling her
without, knew I course of and : ago years many
great a it made had you said she. Me told Isa what
from was it? For meant was it who out made I
how know you do! Lasted has it well how and.
Grandfather my for made had you Antimacassar
pretty that me give to you of nice so was it, Nellie
dear my.”
He had often written a looking-glass letter which
could only be read by holding it up to a mirror,
but this sort of writing was a new departure.
In one of her letters Isa sent “ sacks full of love
and baskets full of kisses.”
“How badly you do spell your words!” he
answered her. “I was so puzzled about the 'sacks
full of love and baskets full of kisses.' But at last
I made out that, of course, you meant a 'sack
full of gloves and a basket full of kittens.'” Then
18

264
he composed a regular nonsense story on the
subject. Isa and her sisters called it the "glove
and kitten letter ” and read it over and over with
much delight, for it was full of quaint fancies,
such as Lewis Carroll loved to shower upon the
children.
When“ Bootle's Baby” was put upon the stage,
Maggie Bowman, though but a tiny child, played
the part of Mignon, the little lost girl, who walked
into the hearts of the soldiers, and especially one
young fellow, to whom she clung most of all. Lewis
Carroll, besides taking a personal interest in Maggie
herself, was charmed with the play, which appealed
to him strongly, so when little Maggie came to Ox-
ford with the company she was treated like a queen.
She stayed four days, during which time her
“Uncle " took her to see everything worth looking
at, and made a rhyming diary for her which he
called-
MAGGIE'S VISIT TO OXFORD.
When Maggie once to Oxford came
On tour as “ Bootle's Baby,"
She said: “I'll see this place of fame,
However dull the day be ! ”
So with her friend she visited
The sights that it was rich in,
And first of all she poked her head
Inside the Christ Church Kitchen.

265
The cooks around that little child
Stood waiting in a ring;
And every time that Maggie smiled,
Those cooks began to sing-
Shouting the Battle-cry of Freedom !
“Roast, boil, and bake,
For Maggie's sake!
Bring cutlets fine
For her to dine;
Meringues so sweet
For her to eat-
For Maggie may be
Bootle's Baby.”
There are a great many verses describing her
walks and what she saw, among other wonders “a
lovely Pussy Cat.”
And everywhere that Maggie went
That Cat was sure to go- .
Shouting the Battle-cry of Freedom !
“Miaow! Miaow !
Come make your bow!
Take off your hats,
Ye Pussy Cats !
And purr and purr
To welcome her-
For Maggie may be
Bootle's Baby!”
So back to Christ Church—not too late
For them to go and see
A Christ Church Undergraduate,
Who gave them cakes and tea.

266
In Magdalen Park the deer are wild
With joy that Maggie brings
Some bread, a friend had given the child,
To feed the pretty things.
They flock round Maggie without fear,
They breakfast and they lunch, .
They dine, they sup, those happy deer-
Still as they munch and munch,
Shouting the Battle-cry of Freedom!
“ Yes, deer are we,
And dear is she.
We love this child
So sweet and mild:
We all are fed
With Maggie's bread-
For Maggie may be
Bootle's Baby !”
They met a Bishop on their way-
A Bishop large as life-
With loving smile that seemed to say
“Will Maggie be my wife?”
Maggie thought not, because you see
She was so very young,
And he was old as old could be-
So Maggie held her tongue.
"My Lord, she's Bootle's Baby; we
Are going up and down,”
Her friend explained, “ that she may see
The sights of Oxford-town.”

267
“Now, say what kind of place it is !”
The Bishop gayly cried,
“ The best place in the Provinces ! ”
The little maid replied.
Away next morning Maggie went
From Oxford-town; but yet
The happy hours she there had spent
She could not soon forget.
“Oxford, good-bye!
She seemed to sigh,
You dear old City
With gardens pretty,
And lawns and flowers
And College towers,
And Tom's great Bell,
Farewell ! farewell!
For Maggie may be
Bootle's Baby!”
Here is just a piece of a letter which shows that
Lewis Carroll could tease when he liked. It is evi-
dent that Isa wished to buy the “ Alice” book in
French, to give to a friend, so she naïvely wrote to
headquarters to ask the price. This is the reply:
“Eastbourne.
“My Own DARLING ISA,—The value of a copy of
the French · Alice' is £45: but, as you want the
'cheapestkind, and as you are a great friend of
mine, and as I am of a very noble, generous disposi-
tion, I have made up my mind to a great sacrifice,

268
and have taken £3, ios, od, off the price, so that
you do not owe me more than £41, ios, od, and this
you can pay me, in gold or bank notes, as soon as
you ever like. Oh, dear! I wonder why I write
such nonsense! Can you explain to me, my pet, how
it happens that when I take up my pen to write a
letter to you, it won't write sense. Do you think the
rule is that when the pen finds it has to write to a
nonsensical, good-for-nothing child it sets to work
to write a nonsensical, good-for-nothing letter?
Well, now I'll tell you the real truth. As Miss Kitty
Wilson is a dear friend of yours, of course she's a
sort of a friend of mine. So I thought (in my
vanity) ‘perhaps she would like to have a copy
“ from the author" with her name written in it.' So
I sent her one-but I hope she'll understand that I
do it because she's your friend, for you see I had
never heard of her before; so I wouldn't have any
other reason.”
When he published his last long story, “ Sylvie
and Bruno," the dedication was to her, an acrostic
on her name; but as “ Sylvie and Bruno " will be
spoken of later on, perhaps it will be more interest-
ing to give the dainty little verses where they belong.
He sent his pet a specially bound copy of the new
book, with the following letter :
“Christ Church, May 16, '90.
“ DEAREST ISA:- I had this bound for you when
the book first came out, and it's been waiting here

269
n-
ever since Dec. 17, for I really didn't dare to send
it across the Atlantic—the whales are so incon-
siderate. They'd have been sure to want to borrow
it to show to the little whales, quite forgetting that
the salt water would be sure to spoil it.
“ Also I've been waiting for you to get back to
send Emsie the “ Nursery Alice.' I give it to the
youngest in a family generally, but I've given one
to Maggie as well, because she travels about so
much, and I thought she would like to have one to
take with her. I hope Nellie's eyes won't get quite
green with jealousy at two (indeed three) of her
sisters getting presents, and nothing for her! I've
nothing but my love to send her to-day, but she shall
have something some day.-Ever your loving
“UNCLE CHARLES."
The “ Nursery Alice” he refers to was arranged
by himself for children" from naught to five" as
he quaintly puts it. It contained twenty beautiful
colored drawings from the Tenniel illustrations,
with a cover designed by E. Gertrude Thomson, of
whose work he was very fond. The words were
simplified for nursery readers.
In another letter to Isa he talks very seriously
about “ social position.”
“ Ladies,” he writes, “ have to be much more
particular in observing the distinctions of what is
called 'social position, and the lower their own po-
sition is (in the scale of ‘lady’ship) the more jeal-

270
ous they seem to be in guarding it. . . . Not
long ago I was staying in a house with a young lady
(about twenty years old I should think) with a title
of her own, as she was an earl's daughter. I hap-
pened to sit next to her at dinner, and every time I
spoke to her she looked at me more as if she was
looking down on me from about a mile up in the air,
and as if she was saying to herself, “How dare you
speak to me! Why you're not good enough to black
my shoes!' It was so unpleasant that next day at
luncheon I got as far from her as I could.
“Of course we are all quite equal in God's sight,
but we do make a lot of distinctions (some of them
quite unmeaning) among ourselves!”
However, he was not always so unfortunate
among great people, the “truly great" that is. In
Lord Salisbury's house he was always a welcome
and honored guest, for in a letter to "his little girl"
from Hatfield House he tells her of the Duchess of
Albany and her two children.
“She is the widow of Prince Leopold (the
Queen's youngest son), so her children are a Prince
and a Princess; the girl is Alice, but I don't know
the boy's Christian name; they call him ' Albany
because he is the Duke of Albany.
"Now that I have made friends with a real live
little Princess, I don't intend ever to speak to chil-
dren who haven't any titles. In fact, I'm so proud,
and I hold my chin so high, that I shouldn't even see
you if we met! No, darlings, you mustn't believe

271
that. If I made friends with a dozen Princesses, I
would love you better than all of them together,
even if I had them all rolled up into a sort of child-
roly-poly.
“Love to Nellie and Emsie.—Your loving Uncle,
“ C.L.D.
“X X X X X X X
“ [kisses]."
Nothing could give us a better glimpse of the
wholesome nature of this quiet“ don” of ours than
these letters to a little child; a wholesome child like
himself, whose every emotion was to him like the
page of some fairy book, to be read and read again.
Isa Bowman could not know, child as she was, what
she was to this man, who with all his busy life, and
all his gifts and talents, and all his many friend-
ships, was so curiously lonely. But later, when she
was grown, and wrote the little book of memories
from which we have drawn so many sweet lessons,
she doubtless realized, as she rolled back the years,
what they had been to her—and what to Lewis
Carroll.

CHAPTER XIV.
Is all our life, then, but a dream,
Seen faintly in the golden gleam
Athwart Time's dark resistless stream?
Bowed to the earth with bitter woe,
Or laughing at some raree-show,
We fitter idly to and fro.
Man's little day in haste we spend,
And from its merry noontide send
No glance to meet the silent end.
1 HIS beautiful dedication to little Isa
Bowman, on the front page of “ Sylvie
and Bruno," was much prized by her on
account of the double acrostic cleverly
woven in the lines. The first letter of each line read
downward was one way she could see her name,
and the first three letters in the first line of each
verse was another, but naturally the light-hearted
child missed the note of deep sadness underlying the
tuneful words. Lewis Carroll had reached that
milestone in a man's life, not when he pauses to
look backward, but when his one desire is to press
272

273
forward to the heights—to the goal. His thoughts
were not so much colored by memories of earlier
years as by anticipation, even dreams of what the
future might hold. Therefore, in our trip with
Sylvie and Bruno into the realms of dreamland, we
must bear in mind in reading the story that the man
is the dreamer, and not the children, nor does he see
quite through their eyes in his views of men and
things. Children, as a rule, live in the present;
neither the past nor the future perplexes them, and
“Mister Sir,” as little Bruno called their friend,
the Dreamer, looked on these fairy children, dainty
Sylvie and graceful Bruno, as gleams of light in
his shadowy way, little passing gleams, as elusive as
they were brilliant.
The day of the irresponsible, bubbling nonsense
is over; we catch flashes of it now and then, but the
fun is forced, and however much of a dear Sylvie
may be, and however much of a darling Bruno may
be, they are not quite natural.
In a very long and very serious preface, wholly
unlike his usual style, the author tells us something
of the history of the book. As early as 1867 the
idea of “ Sylvie and Bruno" first came to him in
the shape of a little fairy tale which he wrote for
Aunt Judy's Magazine, but it was not until long
after the publication of “ Alice Through the Look-
ing-Glass" that he determined to turn the adven-
tures of these fairy children into something more
than stray stories. The public, at least, the insa-

274
tiable children, wanted something more from him,
and as the second " Alice" had been so satisfactory,
he decided to venture again into the dream-world;
he would not hurry about it; he would take his time;
he would pluck a flower here and there as the years
passed, and press it for safe-keeping; he would
create something poetic and beautiful in the way of
children, culled from the best of all the children he
ever knew. This work should be a gem, cut and
polished until its luster eclipsed all other work
of his.
And so from 1874 to 1889, a period of fifteen
years, he jotted down quaint fancies and bits of dia-
logue which he thought would work well into the
story. During this interval he passed from the
prime of life into serious middle age, though there
was so little change in his outward living and in his
general appearance (he was always very boyish-
looking) that even he himself failed to recognize
the gulf of time between forty-two and fifty-seven.
In this interval he had become deeply interested
in the study of logic and when he began to gather
together the mass of material he had collected for
his book, he found so much matter which stepped
outside of childish realms that he decided to please
both the “grown-ups " and the youngsters by weav-
ing it all into a story, which he accordingly did, with
the result that he pleased no one. The children would
not take the trouble to wade through the inter-
woven love story, while their elders, who from ex-

275
perience had expected something fresh and breezy
from the pen of Lewis Carroll, who longed to get
away from the world of facts and logic and deep dis-
cussions which buzzed about them, were even more
sorely disappointed.
All fights of genius are short and quick. Had
our author sat down when the idea of a long story
first came to him, and written it off in his natural
style, “ Sylvie and Bruno” might have been an-
other of the world's classics; but he put too much
thought upon it, and the chapters show most
plainly where the pen was laid down and where
taken up again.
But for all that the book sold well, chiefly, indeed,
because it was Lewis Carroll who wrote it; though
its popularity died down in a short time. About six
years ago, however (1904), the enterprising pub-
lishers brought forth a new edition of the book,
leaving out all the grown-up part, and bringing the
fairy children right before us in all their simple
loveliness. The experiment, so far as the story
went, was most successful, and to those who have
not a previous acquaintance with “ Sylvie and
Bruno” this little volume would give much more
pleasure than the big two-volume original.
One of Lewis Carroll's special objects in writing
this story was a sort of tardy appreciation of the
much-despised boy. In the character of Bruno he
has given us a sweet little fellow, but we cannot get
over the feeling that he is a girl in boy's clothes,

276
his bits of mischiei are all so dainty and alluring;
but we would like to beat him with, say, a spray of
goldenrod for such a fairy child, every time he says
politely and priggishly “ Mister Sir” to his invis-
ible companion. What boy was ezer guilty of using
such a term! The street urchin would naturally say
“ Mister," but the well-bred home boy would say
“Sir," so the combination sounds absurd.
Sylvie and Bruno were supposed to be the fairies
that teach children to be good, and to do this they
wandered pretty well over the earth in their fairy
way. Somehow we miss the real children through
all their dainty play and laughter, but the pictures
of the two children, by Harry Furniss, are beautiful
enough to make us really believe in fairies. There
is a question Lewis Carroll asks quite gravely in his
book-“What is the best time for seeing Fairies?”
And he answers it in truly Lewis Carroll style:
“The first rule is, that it must be a very hot day-
that we may consider as settled: and you must be a
little sleepy—but not too sleepy to keep your eyes
open, mind. Well, and you ought to feel a little
what one may call 'fairyish,' the Scotch call it
‘eerie,' and perhaps that's a prettier word; if you
don't know what it means, I'm afraid I can hardly
explain it; you must wait till you meet a Fairy and
then you'll know.
“And the last rule is, that the crickets should not
be chirping. I can't stop to explain that; you must
take it on trust for the present.

277
“So, if all these things happen together, you have
a good chance of seeing a Fairy, or at least a much
better chance than if they didn't.”
Later on he tells us the rule about the crickets.
“They always leave off chirping when a Fairy goes
by, . . . so whenever you're walking out and the
crickets suddenly leave off chirping you may be sure
that they see a Fairy.”
Another dainty description is Bruno's singing to
the accompaniment of tuneful harebells, and the
song was a regular serenade:
Rise, oh, rise! The daylight dies,
The owls are hooting, ting, ting, ting!
Wake, oh, wake! Beside the lake
The elves are Auting, ting, ting, ting!
Welcoming our Fairy King,
We sing, sing, sing.
Hear, oh, hear! From far and near
The music stealing, ting, ting, ting!
Fairy bells adorn the dells
Are merrily pealing, ting, ting, ting!
Welcoming our Fairy King,
We ring, ring, ring.
See, oh, see! On every tree
What lamps are shining, ting, ting, ting!
· They are eyes of fiery flies
To light our dining, ting, ting, ting!
Welcoming our Fairy King,
They swing, swing, swing.

278
Haste, oh, haste, to take and taste
The dainties waiting, ting, ting, ting!
Honey-dew is stored-
But here Bruno's song came to a sudden end and
was never finished. Fairies have the oddest ways of
doing things, but then Sylvie was coming through
the long grass, that charming woodland child that
little Bruno loved and teased.
The artist put all his skill into the drawing of
this tiny maiden, skill assisted by Lewis Carroll's
own ideas of what a fairy-girl should look like, and
the fact that Mr. Furniss took seven years to illus-
trate this book to the author's satisfaction and his
own, shows how very particular both were to get at
the spirit of the story.
Indeed, the great trouble with the story is that it
is all spirit; there is no real story to it, and this the
keen scent of everyday children soon discovered.
But in one thing it excels: the verses are every bit
as charming as either the Wonderland or Looking-
Glass verses, with all the old-time delicious non-
sense. Take, for instance-
THE GARDENER'S SONG.
He thought he saw an Albatross
That Auttered round the lamp;
He looked again, and found it was
A Penny-Postage-Stamp.
“ You'd best be getting home," he said:
“ The nights are very damp !”

279
He thought he saw an Argument
That proved he was the Pope;
He looked again, and found it was
A Bar-of-Mottled-Soap.
“A fact so dread,” he faintly said,
“Extinguishes all hope !”
He thought he saw a Banker's-Clerk
Descending from the Bus;
He looked again, and found it was
A Hippopotamus.
“If this should stay to dine," he said,
“ There won't be much for us!”
He thought he saw a Buffalo
Upon the chimney-piece;
He looked again, and found it was
His Sister's-Husband's-Niece.
“Unless you leave this house," he said,
" I'll send for the police !”
He thought he saw a Coach-and-Four
That stood beside his bed;
He looked again, and found it was
A Bear without a head.
“Poor thing!” he said, “poor, silly thing!
It's waiting to be fed ! ”.
He thought he saw a Garden-Door
That opened with a key;
He looked again, and found it was
A Double-Rule-of-Three.
“ And all its mystery," he said,
“ Is clear as day to me!”
19

280
He thought he saw a Kangaroo
That worked a coffee-mill;
He looked again, and found it was
A Vegetable-Pill.
“Were I to swallow this," he said,
“I should be very ill !”
He thought he saw a Rattlesnake
That questioned him in Greek;
He looked again, and found it was
The Middle-of-Next-Week.
" The one thing I regret,” he said,
“Is that it cannot speak!”
The gardener was a very remarkable person,
whose time was spent raking the beds and making
up extra verses to this beautiful poem; the last one
ran :
He thought he saw an Elephant
That practiced on a fife;
He looked again, and found it was
A letter from his wife.
“At length I realize," he said,
“The bitterness of Life!”
“What a wild being it was who sung these wild
words! A gardener he seemed to be, yet surely a
mad one by the way he brandished his rake, madder
by the way he broke ever and anon into a frantic jig,
maddest of all by the shriek in which he brought out
the last words of the stanza.
" It was so far a description of himself that he had
the feet of an elephant, but the rest of him was skin

281
and bone; and the wisps of loose straw that bristled
all about him suggested that he had been originally
stuffed with it, and that nearly all the stuffing had
come out.”
In “Sylvie and Bruno," probably to a greater ex-
tent than in all his other books, are some clever cari-
catures of well-known people. The two professors
are certainly taken from life, probably from Oxford.
One is called “The Professor" and one “The Other
Professor.” The Baron, the Vice-Warden and my
Lady were all too real, and as for the fat Prince
Uggug, well, any kind feeling Lewis Carroll may
have had toward boys when he fashioned Bruno had
entirely vanished when Prince Uggug came upon
the scene. All the ugly, rough, ill-mannered, bad
boys Lewis Carroll had ever heard of were rolled
into this wretched, fat, pig of a prince; but the story
of this prince proved fascinating to the real little
royalties to whom he told it during one Christmas
week at Lord Salisbury's. Most likely he selected
this story with an object, in order to show how nec-
essary it was that those of royal blood should behave
like true princes and princesses if they would be
truly loved. Our good “don " was fond of point-
ing a moral now and then. Uggug, with all his
badness, somehow appeals to the human child, far
more than Bruno, with his baby talk and his old-
man wisdom and his odd little “ fay” ways. Syl-
vie was much more natural. Bruno, however, was
a sweet little songster; it needed no urging to set

282
him to music, and he always sang quite plainly when
he had real rhymes to tackle. One of his favorites
was called :
THE BADGERS AND THE HERRINGS.
There be three Badgers on a mossy stone,
Beside a dark and covered way.
Each dreams himself a monarch on his throne,
And so they stay and stay-
Though their old Father languishes alone,
They stay, and stay, and stay.
There be three Herrings loitering around,
Longing to share that mossy seat.
Each Herring tries to sing what she has found
That makes life seem so sweet.
Thus, with a grating and uncertain sound,
They bleat, and bleat, and bleat.
The Mother-Herring, on the salt sea-wave,
Sought vainly for her absent ones;
The Father-Badger, writhing in a cave,
Shrieked out, “Return, my sons !
You shall have buns,” he shrieked, “if you'll behave!
Yea buns, and buns, and buns!”.
'“I fear,” said she, “your sons have gone astray.
My daughters left me while I slept.”
“ Yes’m,” the Badger said, “it's as you say.
They should be better kept.”
Thus the poor parents talked the time away,
And wept, and wept, and wept.

283
But the thoughtless young ones, who had wan-
dered from home, are having a good time, a rollick-
ing good time, for the Herrings sing:
Oh, dear, beyond our dearest dreams,
Fairer than all that fairest seems!
To feast the rosy hours away,
To revel in a roundelay!
How blest would be
A life so free
Ipwergis pudding to consume
And drink the subtle Azzigoom!
And if in other days and hours,
'Mid other fluffs and other flowers,
The choice were given me how to dine-
“Name what thou wilt: it shall be thine I".
Oh, then I see
The life for me-
Ipwergis pudding to consume
And drink the subtle Azzigoom!
The Badgers did not care to talk to Fish;
They did not dote on Herrings' songs;
They never had experienced the dish
To which that name belongs.
“And, oh, to pinch their tails” (this was their wish)
“With tongs, yea, tongs, and tongs !”.
“And are not these the Fish,” the eldest sighed,
“Whose mother dwells beneath the foam?”
“ They are the Fish!” the second one replied,
"And they have left their home!”
“Oh, wicked Fish,” the youngest Badger cried,
“To roam, yea, roam, and roam !”

284
Gently the Badgers trotted to the shore-
The sandy shore that fringed the bay.
Each in his mouth a living Herring bore
Those aged ones waxed gay.
Clear rang their voices through the ocean's roar.
“ Hooray, hooray, hooray!'”
Most of Lewis Carroll's best nonsense rhymes
abounded with all sorts of queer animals. In ear-
lier years he had made quite a study of natural his-
tory, so that he knew enough about the habits of
the animals who figured in his verses to make hu-
morous portraits of them. Yet we know, apart
from the earth-worms and snails of "little boy "
days, he never cared to cultivate their acquaintance
except in a casual way. He was never unkind to
them, and fought with all his might against vivisec-
tion (which in plain English means cutting up live
animals for scientific purposes), as well as against
the cruel pastime of English cross-country hunting,
where one poor little fox is run to earth and torn in
pieces by the savage hounds. Big hunting, where
the object was a man-eating lion or some other ani-
mal which menaced human life, he heartily approved
of, but wanton cruelty he could not abide. Yet the
dog he might use every effort to save from the knife
of science did not appeal to him as a pet; he pre-
ferred a nice, plump, rosy-cheeked, bright-eyed,
ringleted little girl—if she liked dogs, why, very
well, only none of them in his rooms, thank you! -
These fairy children, Sylvie and Bruno, travel

285
many leagues in the story, for good fairies must be
able to go from place to place very quickly. We find
them in Elfand, and Outland, and even Dogland.
A quaint episode in this book is the loss of Queen
Titania's baby.
“We put it in a flower,” Sylvie explained, with
her eyes full of tears. “ Only we can't remember
which!” And there's a real fairy hunt for the
missing baby, which must have been found some-
where, for fairies are never completely lost. All
through this fairy tale move real people doing real
things, acting real parts, coming often in contact
with their good fairies, but parting always on the
borderland, bearing with them but a memory of the
beautiful children, and an echo of Sylvie's song as
it dies away in the distance.
Say, what is the spell, when her fledglings are cheeping,
That lures the bird home to her nest?
Or wakes the tired mother, whose infant is weeping,
To cuddle and
To cuddle and croon it to rest?
What's the magic that charms the glad babe in her arms,
Till it cooes with the voice of the dove?
'Tis a secret, and so let us whisper it low-
And the name of the secret is Love !
For I think it is Love,
For I feel it is Love,
For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!
Say, whence is the voice that, when anger is burning,
Bids the whirl of the tempest to cease?
That stirs the vexed soul with an aching—a yearning
For the brotherly hand-grip of peace?

286
Whence the music that fills all our being—that thrills
Around us, beneath, and above?
'Tis a secret; none knows how it comes, how it goes;
But the name of the secret is Love !
For I think it is Love,
For I feel it is Love,
For I'm sure it is nothing but Love !
Say, whose is the skill that paints valley and hill,
Like a picture so fair to the sight?
That decks the green meadow with sunshine and shadow,
Till the little lambs leap with delight?
'Tis a secret untold to hearts cruel and cold,
Though 'tis sung by the angels above,
In notes that ring clear for the ears that can hear-
And the name of the secret is Love!
For I think it is Love,
For I feel it is Love,
For I'm sure it is nothing but Love !

CHAPTER XV.
OVE was indeed the keynote of Lewis
Carroll's life. It was his rule, which
governed everything he did, whether it
was a lecture on mathematics or a “non-
sense" story to a group of little girls. It was, above
all, his religion, and meant much more to him than
mere church forms, though the beautiful services at
Oxford always impressed him deeply. Living as
he did, apart from the stir and bustle of a great city,
in a beautiful old town, full of historic associations,
the heart and center of English learning, where men
had time for high thoughts and high deeds, it is no
wonder that his ideals should soar beyond the limits
of an everyday world, and no one who watched the
daily routine of this quiet, self-contained, precise
“ don” could imagine how the great heart beneath
the student's clerical coat craved the love of those
for whom he truly cared.
Outsiders saw only a busy scholar, absorbed in
his work, to all appearances somewhat of a recluse.
It is true, however, that his last busy years, devoted
287

288
to a book on “ Symbolic Logic,” kept him tied to his
study during most of the Oxford term, and that in
consequence he had little time for sociability, if he
wished to complete his work.
The first part of “Symbolic Logic” was pub-
lished in 1896, and although sixty-four years old at
the time, his writing and his reasoning were quite
as clear as in the earlier days. He never reached
the point of "going down hill.” Everything that
he undertook showed the vigorous strain in him, and
though the end of his life was not far off, those who
loved him were never tortured by a long and pain-
ful illness. As he said of himself, his life had been
so singularly free from the cares and worries that
assail most people, the current flowed so evenly that
his mental and physical health endured till the
last.
In later years the tall, slim figure, the clean-
shaven, delicate, refined face, the quiet, courteous,
rather distant manner, were much commented upon
alike by friends and strangers. With “grown-
ups " he had always the air of the absent-minded
scholar, but no matter how occupied, the presence of
a little girl broke down the crust of his reserve and
he became immediately the sunny companion, the
fascinating weaver of tales, the old, enticing Lewis
Carroll.
But he was above all things what we would call
“a settled old bachelor.” He had little "ways "
essentially his own, little peculiarities in which no

289
doubt he took a secret and childish pride. With
children these were always more or less amusing.
If he was going on a railway journey, for in-
stance, he mapped out every minute of his time; then
he would calculate the amount of money to be spent,
and he always carried two purses, arranging me-
thodically the sums for cabs, porters, newspapers,
refreshments, and so forth, in different partitions, so
he always had the correct change and always secured
the best of service. In packing he was also very
particular; everything in his trunk had to be sepa-
rately wrapped up in a piece of paper, and his lug-
gage (he probably traveled with several trunks) al-
ways preceded him by a day or so, while his only
encumbrance was a well-known little black bag
which he always carried himself.
In dress, he was also a trifle “odd.” He was
scrupulously neat and very scholarly in appearance,
with frock coat and immaculate linen, but he never
wore an overcoat no matter how cold the weather,
and in all seasons he wore a pair of gray and black
cotton gloves and a tall hat.
He had a horror of staring colors, especially in
little girls' dresses. He loved pink and gray, but
any child visiting him, who dared to bring with her
a dress of startling hue, such as red or green or yel-
low, was forbidden to wear it in his company.
His appetite was unusually small, and he used
to marvel at the good solid food his girl friends
managed to consume. Once, when he took a
m
CO

290
special favorite out to dine, he warned his host-
ess to be careful in helping her as she ate far too
much.
In writing, he seldom sat down; how he managed
we are not told, but most likely his desk was a high
one.
He was a great walker in all winds and weather.
Sometimes he overdid it, and came home with blis-
tered feet and aching joints, sometimes soaked to
the skin when overtaken by an unexpected rain; but
always elated over the distance he had traveled.
He forgot, in the sheer delight of active exercise,
that he was not absolutely proof against illness, and
that added years needed added care; and as we find
that the many severe colds which now constantly
attacked him came usually in the winter, there is
every reason to believe that human imprudence
weakened a very strong constitution, and that Lewis
Carroll minus an overcoat meant Lewis Carroll plus
a very bad cold.
On one occasion (February, 1895) he was laid up
with a ten days' attack of influenza, with very high
and alarming fever. Yet as late as December,
1897, a few weeks before his death, he boasted of
sitting in his large room with no fire, an open win-
dow, and a temperature of 54°.
Another time he had a severe attack of illness
which prevented him from spending his usual
Christmas with his sisters at Guildford. He was a
prisoner in his room for over six weeks, but in writ-

291
ing to one of his beloved child friends he joked
over it all, his only regret being the loss of the
Christmas plum pudding.
From the time of the publication of " Alice in
Wonderland ” Lewis Carroll was a man of inde-
pendent means; had he wished, he might have lived
in great style and luxury, but being simple and un-
assuming in his tastes, he was content with his spa-
cious book-lined rooms, with their air of solid, old-
fashioned comfort. The things around him, which
he cared for most, were things endeared by associa-
tion, from the pictures of his girl friends upon the
walls to that delightful and mysterious cupboard
in which generations of children had loved to rum-
mage.
He was fond, too, of practicing little economies
where one would least expect them. In giving
those enjoyable dinners of his, he kept neatly cut
pieces of cardboard to slip under the plates and
dishes; table mats he considered a needless luxury
and a mere waste of money, while the cardboard
could be renewed from time to time, with little trou-
ble or expense. But if he wished to buy books for
himself or take some little girl pet off for a treat, he
never seemed to count the cost, and he gave so gen-
erously that many a child of the old days has cause
to remember. On one occasion he found a crowd
of ragamuffins surrounding the window of a shop
where they were cooking cakes. Something in the
wistful glances of the little street urchins stirred

292
him strangely as he was passing by, a little girl on
either side of him. Suddenly he darted into the
shop, and before long came out, his arms piled with
the freshly made cakes, which he passed around to
the hungry, big-eyed little fellows, leaving the small
girls inside the shop, where they could enjoy the
pretty scene which stamped itself forever in their
memories.
His charities were never known, save that he gave
freely in many directions. He was opposed to lend-
ing money, but if the case was worthy he was will-
ing to give whatever was necessary, and this he did
with a kindliness and grace peculiarly his own. He
was interested in hospitals, especially the children's
wards, and many a donation of books and pictures
and games and puzzles found their way to these
pathetic little sufferers, whose heavy hours were
lightened by his thoughtfulness. Hundreds of the
“ Alice” books were given in this fashion and many
a generous check anonymously sent eased the pain
of a great big sorrowful world of sick children.
After his death his old friends, wishing that some-
thing special should be done to honor his memory,
subscribed a sum of money to endow a cot in the
Children's Hospital in Great Ormond Street. This
was called the “ Alice in Wonderland” cot, and
is devoted to little patients connected with the
stage, in which he had always shown such an
interest.
Much has been said of Lewis Carroll's reverence

293
for sacred things; from the days of his solemn little
boyhood this was a most noticeable trait of his char-
acter. He had, as we have seen, no “cut and
dried ” notions regarding religion, but he was old-
fashioned in many of his ideas, and while he did not
believe in making the Sabbath a day of dull, mo-
notonous ordeal, he set it apart from other days, and
made of it a beautiful day of rest. He put from
him the weekly cares and worries, brushing aside
all work, and requiring others connected with him
to do likewise. He wrote to Miss E. Gertrude
Thomson, who was illustrating “ The Three Sun-
sets ”_his last collection of poems—(published in
1898), that she would oblige him greatly by mak-
ing no drawings or photographs for him on a
Sunday.
When he could, especially during the last years
of his life, he gave a sermon, either at Guildford,
Eastbourne, or at Oxford. It was through his in-
Auence that the Sunday dinner hour at the Univer-
sity was changed from seven to six o'clock, in order
that the servants might be able to attend services.
These he often conducted himself, and sometimes,
in his direct and earnest talks, appealed to many
who were hard to reach. Above all, however, a
flock of children inspired his best efforts, and the
simple fact that he always practiced what he
preached made his words all the more impressive.
In short, but for the impediment in his speech, he,
would have made a great preacher.

294
It was this simple, childlike faith of his that kept
him always young-in touch with the youth about
him. Old age was never associated with him, and
constant exercise made him as lithe and active as
a boy. There is an amusing tale of some distin-
guished personage who went to call on the Rev.
Mr. Hatch, and while waiting for his host, he heard
a great commotion under the dining table. Stoop-
ing down he saw children's legs waving frantically
below, and, diving down himself to join the fun,
he came face to face with Lewis Carroll, who had
been the foundation of this animated, wriggling
mass.
On another occasion Lewis Carroll went to call
upon a friend, and finding her out, was about to
turn away, when the maid, who had come from the
front door to answer the bell at the gate, gave a
startled cry—for the door had blown shut, and she
was locked out of the house. Lewis Carroll was,
as usual, equal to the occasion; he borrowed a lad-
der from some kind neighbor, climbed in at the
drawing-room window, and after performing nu-
merous acrobatic feats of the “small boy" type,
managed to open the front door for the anxious
maid.
His constant association with children made his
activity in many ways equal to theirs. He certainly
could outwalk them, for eighteen to twenty miles
could not daunt him, and many a small girl who was
brave enough to accompany him on what he called

295
"a short walk ” had tired feet and aching joints
when the walk was over.
On December 23, 1897, he made ready for his
yearly visit to Guildford, where he spent the usual
happy Christmas, but in the early part of the New
Year a slight hoarseness heralded the return of his
old ememy_influenza. At first there seemed to be
nothing alarming in his illness, but the disease
spread very rapidly. The labored breathing, the
short, painful gasps, quickly sapped his strength.
On January 14, 1898, before his anxious family
could quite realize it, the blow had fallen; the life
which had meant so much to them, to everyone,
went out, as Lewis Carroll folded his hands, closed
his eyes, and said with that unquestioning faith,
which had been his mainstay through the years:
“ Father, Thy will be done ! ” .
Through the land there was mourning. Count-
less children bowed their sunny heads as the storm
of grief passed over them, and it seemed as if, dur-
ing the quiet funeral, a hush had come upon the
world. They laid him to rest beneath the shadow
of a tall pine, and a pure white cross bearing his
own name and the name of “ Lewis Carroll ” rose
to mark the spot, that the children who passed by
might never forget their friend.
It seems, indeed, now that the years have passed,
that the Angel of Death was very gentle with this
fair soul. After all, does he not live in the happy
fun and laughter he has left behind him, and will
20

296
not the coming generations of children find in the
wonder tales the same fascination that held the chil-
dren of long ago? While childhood lasts on earth,
while the memory of him lives in millions of child-
ish hearts, Lewis Carroll can never die.
THE END.



